-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 I4dMnYZxUShBdzRFvdB7bXBWMoxkuNJpF/6adpVKjt/Fov8D8jOvoO0Qwjf8hsVD
 ipCIhWKK0/bk9lYnx998yw==

<SEC-DOCUMENT>0001047469-99-008952.txt : 19990310
<SEC-HEADER>0001047469-99-008952.hdr.sgml : 19990310
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0001047469-99-008952
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		10
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	19981231
FILED AS OF DATE:		19990309

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			ABBOTT LABORATORIES
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000001800
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATIONS [2834]
		IRS NUMBER:				360698440
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			IL
		FISCAL YEAR END:			1231

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-02189
		FILM NUMBER:		99560076

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		100 ABBOTT PARK ROAD
		STREET 2:		D-322 AP6D
		CITY:			ABBOTT PARK
		STATE:			IL
		ZIP:			60064-3500
		BUSINESS PHONE:		(708)-937-6100
</SEC-HEADER>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>10-K
<SEQUENCE>1
<DESCRIPTION>10-K
<TEXT>

<PAGE>
- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
                                 UNITED STATES
                       SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
                            WASHINGTON, D. C. 20549
                            ------------------------
 
                                   FORM 10-K
 
(MARK ONE)
 
/X/ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT
    OF 1934
 
                                       OR
 
/ /  TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
    EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
                            ------------------------
 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 1998        COMMISSION FILE NUMBER 1-2189
 
                     [LOGO]            ABBOTT LABORATORIES
 
<TABLE>
<S>                                    <C>
       AN ILLINOIS CORPORATION                      36-0698440
                                          (I.R.S. employer identification
                                                      number)
 
        100 ABBOTT PARK ROAD                      (847) 937-6100
  ABBOTT PARK, ILLINOIS 60064-6400              (TELEPHONE NUMBER)
</TABLE>
 
          SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE ACT:
 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                  NAME OF EACH EXCHANGE
               TITLE OF EACH CLASS                                 ON WHICH REGISTERED
<S>                                                 <C>
Common Shares, Without Par Value                    New York Stock Exchange
                                                    Chicago Stock Exchange
                                                    Pacific Exchange
</TABLE>
 
INDICATE BY CHECK MARK WHETHER THE REGISTRANT (1) HAS FILED ALL REPORTS REQUIRED
TO BE FILED BY SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 DURING
THE PRECEDING 12 MONTHS (OR FOR SUCH SHORTER PERIOD THAT THE REGISTRANT WAS
REQUIRED TO FILE SUCH REPORTS), AND (2) HAS BEEN SUBJECT TO SUCH FILING
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PAST 90 DAYS.
                                 YES _X_ NO ____
 
INDICATE BY CHECK MARK IF DISCLOSURE OF DELINQUENT FILERS PURSUANT TO ITEM 405
OF REGULATION S-K IS NOT CONTAINED HEREIN AND WILL NOT BE CONTAINED, TO THE BEST
OF REGISTRANT'S KNOWLEDGE, IN DEFINITIVE PROXY OR INFORMATION STATEMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE IN PART III OF THIS FORM 10-K OR ANY AMENDMENT TO THIS
FORM 10-K. [  ]
 
THE AGGREGATE MARKET VALUE OF THE 1,402,593,853 SHARES OF VOTING STOCK HELD BY
NONAFFILIATES OF THE REGISTRANT, COMPUTED BY USING THE CLOSING PRICE AS REPORTED
ON THE CONSOLIDATED TRANSACTION REPORTING SYSTEM FOR ABBOTT LABORATORIES COMMON
SHARES WITHOUT PAR VALUE ON JANUARY 29, 1999, WAS APPROXIMATELY $65,132,952,049.
ABBOTT HAS NO NON-VOTING COMMON EQUITY.
 
NUMBER OF COMMON SHARES OUTSTANDING AS OF JANUARY 31, 1999: 1,517,068,371.
 
                      DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
PORTIONS OF THE ABBOTT LABORATORIES ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER
31, 1998 ARE INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE INTO PARTS I, II, AND IV.
 
PORTIONS OF THE 1999 ABBOTT LABORATORIES PROXY STATEMENT ARE INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE INTO PART III.
 
- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<PAGE>
                                     PART I
 
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
 
                        GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESS
 
    Abbott Laboratories is an Illinois corporation, incorporated in 1900.
Abbott's* principal business is the discovery, development, manufacture, and
sale of a broad and diversified line of health care products and services.
 
              FINANCIAL INFORMATION RELATING TO INDUSTRY SEGMENTS,
               GEOGRAPHIC AREAS, AND CLASSES OF SIMILAR PRODUCTS
 
    Incorporated herein by reference is the footnote entitled "Segment and
Geographic Area Information" of the Consolidated Financial Statements in the
Abbott Laboratories Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 1998 (1998
Annual Report), filed as an exhibit to this report.
 
                       NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
 
    Abbott has six revenue segments: Pharmaceutical Products, Diagnostic
Products, Hospital Products, Ross Products, International, and Chemical and
Agricultural Products. Abbott also has a 50 percent owned joint venture, TAP
Holdings Inc.
 
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS
 
    This segment's products include a broad line of adult and pediatric
pharmaceuticals which are sold primarily on the prescription or recommendation
of physicians.
 
    The principal products included in this segment are the anti-infectives
clarithromycin, sold in the United States under the trademark
Biaxin-Registered Trademark-, and various forms of erythromycin, sold primarily
as PCE-Registered Trademark- or polymer coated erythromycin,
Erythrocin-Registered Trademark-, and E.E.S.-Registered Trademark-; agents for
the treatment of epilepsy, migraine and bipolar disorder, including
Depakote-Registered Trademark- and Gabitril-Registered Trademark-; a broad line
of cardiovascular products, including Hytrin-Registered Trademark-, used as an
anti-hypertensive and for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia;
Abbokinase-Registered Trademark-, a thrombolytic drug; TriCor-TM- for the
treatment of elevated triglycerides; and the anti-viral
Norvir-Registered Trademark-, a protease inhibitor for the treatment of HIV
infection. In addition, this segment co-promotes the proton pump inhibitor
Prevacid-Registered Trademark- (lansoprazole), for the short-term treatment of
duodenal ulcers, gastric ulcers, and erosive esophagitis, under an agreement
with TAP Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
 
    This segment markets its products in the United States. These products are
generally sold directly to wholesalers, government agencies, health care
facilities, and independent retailers from Abbott-owned distribution centers and
public warehouses. Primary marketing efforts for pharmaceutical products are
directed toward securing the prescription of Abbott's brand of products by
physicians. Managed care purchasers (for example, health maintenance
organizations and pharmacy benefit managers) are increasingly important
customers.
 
    Competition is generally from other broad line pharmaceutical companies. A
significant aspect of competition is the search for technological innovations.
The introduction of new products by competitors and changes in medical practices
and procedures can result in product obsolescence. Price can also be a
 
- ------------------------
 
*   As used throughout the text of this report on Form 10-K, the term "Abbott"
    refers to Abbott Laboratories, an Illinois corporation, or Abbott
    Laboratories and its consolidated subsidiaries, as the context requires.
 
                                       1
<PAGE>
factor. In addition, the substitution of generic drugs for the brand prescribed
has increased competitive pressures on pharmaceutical products which are
off-patent.
 
DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS
 
    This segment's products include diagnostic systems and tests for blood
banks, hospitals, commercial laboratories, alternate-care testing sites, and
consumers.
 
    The principal products included in this segment are screening tests for
hepatitis B, HTLV-I/II, hepatitis B core, and hepatitis C; tests for detection
of HIV antibodies and antigens, and other infectious disease detection systems;
tests for determining levels of abused drugs; physiological diagnostic tests;
cancer monitoring tests including tests for prostate specific antigen;
laboratory tests and therapeutic drug monitoring systems such as
TDx-Registered Trademark-; clinical chemistry systems such as Abbott
Spectrum-Registered Trademark-, Abbott Aeroset-TM-, Abbott Alycon-TM-, and
Abbott Vision-Registered Trademark-; Quantum-TM-; AxSYM-Registered Trademark-,
Commander-Registered Trademark-, IMx-Registered Trademark-, and Abbott
PRISM-Registered Trademark- lines of diagnostic instruments and chemical
reagents used to perform immunoassay diagnostic tests; the
Murex-Registered Trademark- line of microtiter-based immunoassay test kits; the
LCx-Registered Trademark- amplified probe system and reagents; the Abbott
TestPack-Registered Trademark- system for rapid diagnostic testing; a full line
of hematology systems and reagents known as the Cell-Dyn-Registered Trademark-
series; the MediSense-Registered Trademark- line of blood glucose monitoring
meters and test strips for diabetics including Precision
Q.I.D.-Registered Trademark-, the Precision G-Registered Trademark- hospital
system, the ExacTech-Registered Trademark-, the MediSense II-TM-, and the
ExacTech RSG-TM-; and the Fact Plus-Registered Trademark- and Fact
Plus-Registered Trademark- One Step pregnancy tests. In addition, this segment
distributes the i-STAT-Registered Trademark- point-of-care testing system
through an exclusive long-term sales and marketing alliance with i-STAT
Corporation. In the second quarter of 1998, Abbott acquired, for cash, all of
the outstanding shares of International Murex Technologies Corporation, a
manufacturer of microtiter-based immunoassay test kits.
 
    This segment markets its products worldwide. These products are generally
marketed and sold directly to hospitals, laboratories, and physicians' offices
from Abbott-owned distribution centers and public warehouses. Outside the United
States, sales are made either directly to customers or through distributors,
depending on the market served. Blood glucose monitoring meters and test strips
for diabetics and the Fact Plus-Registered Trademark- and Fact
Plus-Registered Trademark- One Step pregnancy tests are sold over the counter to
consumers.
 
    This segment's products are subject to competition in technological
innovation, price, convenience of use, service, instrument warranty provisions,
product performance, long-term supply contracts, and product potential for
overall cost-effectiveness and productivity gains. Some products in this segment
can be subject to rapid product obsolescence. Abbott has benefited from
technological advantages of certain of its current products; however, these
advantages may be reduced or eliminated as competitors introduce new products.
 
HOSPITAL PRODUCTS
 
    This segment's products include drugs and drug delivery systems,
perioperative and intensive care products, cardiovascular products, renal
products, oncology products, intravenous and irrigation solutions, related
manual and electronic administration equipment, and diagnostic imaging products
for hospitals and alternate-care sites.
 
    The principal products included in this segment are hospital injectables
including Carpuject-Registered Trademark- and FirstChoice-Registered Trademark-
generics; premixed intravenous drugs in various containers;
ADD-Vantage-Registered Trademark- and Nutrimix-Registered Trademark- drug and
nutritional delivery systems; anesthetics, including
Pentothal-Registered Trademark-, Amidate-Registered Trademark-,
Ultane-Registered Trademark-, isoflurane and enflurane; products for anxiety,
nausea and pain associated with surgery; cardiovascular products including
Opticath-Registered Trademark- and OptiQ-TM- advanced sensor catheters,
Transpac-Registered Trademark- for hemodynamic monitoring, peripheral wires,
catheters and other specialty cardiac products; Calcijex-Registered Trademark-
and Zemplar-Registered Trademark-, injectable agents for treatment of bone
disease in hemodialysis patients; intravenous solutions and related
administration equipment sold as the LifeCare-Registered Trademark- line of
products, LifeShield-Registered Trademark- needleless products, and
Venoset-Registered Trademark- products; irrigating fluids; parenteral
nutritionals such as Aminosyn-Registered Trademark- and
Liposyn-Registered Trademark-; Plum-Registered Trademark-,
Omni-Flow-Registered Trademark- and Abbott
 
                                       2
<PAGE>
AIM-Registered Trademark- electronic drug delivery systems; Abbott Pain
Manager-Registered Trademark-; patient-controlled analgesia systems;
venipuncture products; diagnostic imaging products used in MRI (magnetic
resonance imaging) and CT (computed tomography) imaging; and
Faultless-Registered Trademark- rubber sundry products.
 
    This segment markets its products in the United States. They are generally
distributed to wholesalers and directly to hospitals from Abbott-owned
distribution centers and public warehouses. This segment also develops and
manufactures products for other companies.
 
    This segment's products are subject to competition in technological
innovation, price, convenience of use, service, product performance, long-term
supply contracts, and product potential for overall cost effectiveness and
productivity gains. Some products in this segment can be subject to rapid
product obsolescence. Abbott has benefited from technological advantages of
certain of its current products; however, these advantages may be reduced or
eliminated as competitors introduce new products.
 
ROSS PRODUCTS
 
    This segment's products include a broad line of adult and pediatric
nutritionals. These products are sold primarily on the recommendation of
physicians or other health care professionals. The segment also includes
specialty pharmaceuticals and consumer products.
 
    Principal nutritional products include various forms of prepared infant
formula, including Similac-Registered Trademark-, Isomil-Registered Trademark-,
Alimentum-Registered Trademark-, and Similac NeoSure-TM-; and other adult and
pediatric products, including Ensure-Registered Trademark-, Ensure
Plus-Registered Trademark-, Ensure-Registered Trademark- High Protein,
Ensure-Registered Trademark-Light, Jevity-Registered Trademark-,
Glucerna-Registered Trademark-, PediaSure-Registered Trademark-,
Pedialyte-Registered Trademark-, and Pulmocare-Registered Trademark-. Principal
consumer products include the dandruff shampoo Selsun
Blue-Registered Trademark-; Murine-Registered Trademark- eye care and ear care
products; and Tronolane-Registered Trademark- hemorrhoid medication. The
principal pharmaceutical product is Survanta-Registered Trademark-. In addition,
this segment co-promotes Synagis-Registered Trademark- under an agreement with
Medimmune Incorporated.
 
    This segment markets its products in the United States. Nutritional products
are generally sold directly to retailers, wholesalers, health care facilities,
and government agencies. In most cases, they are distributed from Abbott-owned
distribution centers or public warehouses. Primary marketing efforts for
nutritional products are directed toward securing the recommendation of Abbott's
brand of products by physicians or other health care professionals. Competition
is generally from other broad line and specialized health care manufacturers.
Nutritional products are subject to competition in price, formulation,
scientific innovation, and promotional initiatives.
 
    This segment's pharmaceutical products are generally sold directly to
physicians, retailers, wholesalers, health care facilities, and government
agencies. In most cases, they are distributed from Abbott-owned distribution
centers or public warehouses. Primary marketing efforts for pharmaceutical
products are directed at securing the prescription of Abbott's brand of products
by physicians. Competition is generally from other broad line pharmaceutical
companies. A significant aspect of competition is the search for technological
innovations. The introduction of new products by competitors and changes in
medical practices and procedures can result in product obsolescence. Price can
also be a factor. In addition, the substitution of generic drugs for the brand
prescribed has increased competitive pressures on pharmaceutical products which
are off-patent.
 
    Consumer products and Ensure-Registered Trademark- retail products are
promoted directly to the public by consumer advertising. These products are
generally sold directly to retailers and wholesalers. Competitive products are
sold by other diversified consumer and health care companies. Competitive
factors include consumer advertising, formulation, scientific innovation, price,
and availability of generic product forms.
 
    Ensure-Registered Trademark- is the leading adult nutritional and
Similac-Registered Trademark- is a leading infant formula in the United States.
(Source: A. C. Nielsen Co.)
 
                                       3
<PAGE>
INTERNATIONAL
 
    This segment's products include a broad line of hospital, pharmaceutical and
adult and pediatric nutritional products marketed and primarily manufactured
outside the United States. These products are sold primarily on the prescription
or recommendation of physicians and other health care professionals. This
segment also includes consumer products.
 
    This segment's principal products include the anti-infectives
clarithromycin, sold under the trademarks Biaxin-Registered Trademark-,
Klacid-Registered Trademark- and Klaricid-Registered Trademark-, tosufloxacin,
sold in Japan under the trademark Tosuxacin-Registered Trademark-, various forms
of the antibiotic erythromycin, sold primarily as PCE-Registered Trademark- or
polymer-coated erythromycin, Erythrocin-Registered Trademark-, and
E.E.S.-Registered Trademark-, and Norvir-Registered Trademark-, a protease
inhibitor for the treatment of HIV infection; Lupron-Registered Trademark-, also
marketed as Lucrin-Registered Trademark-, used for the palliative treatment of
advanced prostate cancer, treatment of endometriosis and central precocious
puberty, and for the preoperative treatment of patients with anemia caused by
uterine fibroids; Prevacid-Registered Trademark- (lansoprazole), a proton pump
for the short-term treatment of duodenal ulcers, gastric ulcers, and erosive
esophagitis; various cardiovascular products, including
Loftyl-Registered Trademark-, a vasoactive agent; Hytrin-Registered Trademark-,
also marketed as Hitrin-Registered Trademark- and Flotrin-Registered Trademark-,
used as an anti-hypertensive and for the treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia, and candesartan, sold under the trademarks Blospress-TM- and
Tiadyl-TM-, an angiotension 2 antagonist; meloxicam, a preferential COX-2
inhibitor; various forms of infant formulas and follow-on formulas, including
Similac Advance-Registered Trademark-, Gain-Registered Trademark- and Abbott
Grow-TM-; various adult medical nutritionals, including
Ensure-Registered Trademark-, Glucerna-Registered Trademark- and
Jevity-Registered Trademark-; and a broad line of hospital products, including
the anesthesia products sevoflurane (sold outside of the United States primarily
under the trademark Sevorane-Registered Trademark- and in a few other markets as
Ultane-Registered Trademark-), isoflurane and enflurane; specialty generic
injectables such as Calcijex-Registered Trademark- and
Survanta-Registered Trademark-; and electronic drug delivery systems sold in
selective international markets.
 
    This segment's pharmaceutical and nutritional products are generally sold
directly to government agencies, retailers, wholesalers, and health care
facilities. In most cases, they are distributed from Abbott-owned distribution
centers. Certain products are co-marketed with other companies. Some of these
products are marketed and distributed through distributors. Primary marketing
efforts for pharmaceutical products are directed toward securing the
prescription of Abbott's brand of products by physicians. Competition is
generally from other broad line and specialized pharmaceutical companies. A
significant aspect of competition is the search for technological innovations.
The introduction of new products by competitors and changes in medical practices
and procedures can result in product obsolescence. In addition, the substitution
of generic drugs for the brand prescribed has increased competitive pressures on
pharmaceutical products. Primary marketing efforts for nutritional products are
directed toward securing the recommendation of Abbott's brand of products by
physicians or other health care professionals. Competition is generally from
other broad line and specialized health care manufacturers and food companies.
Nutritional products are subject to competition in price, formulation and
promotional initiatives.
 
    This segment's hospital products are generally distributed to wholesalers
and directly to hospitals from distribution centers maintained by Abbott. This
segment is subject to competition in technological innovation, price,
convenience of use, instrument warranty provisions, product performance,
long-term supply contracts, and product potential for overall cost effectiveness
and productivity gains. Products in this segment can be subject to rapid product
obsolescence. Abbott has benefited from technological advantages of certain of
its current products; however, these advantages may be reduced or eliminated as
competitors introduce new products.
 
CHEMICAL AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
 
    This segment's products include agricultural and chemical products, bulk
pharmaceuticals, and animal health products.
 
                                       4
<PAGE>
    Principal agricultural and animal health products include plant growth
regulators, including ProGibb-Registered Trademark- and
ReTain-Registered Trademark-; herbicides; larvicides, including
VectoBac-Registered Trademark-; biologically derived insecticides, including
DiPel-Registered Trademark- and XenTari-Registered Trademark-; anti-infectives,
and medical surgical products, including Propoflo-TM-,
Isoflo-Registered Trademark- and LIFECARE-Registered Trademark-. Principal
chemical products include erythromycin, leuprolide, and terazosin hydrochloride.
 
    This segment markets its products worldwide. Agricultural, animal health and
bulk pharmaceutical products are generally sold to agricultural distributors,
growers, companion animal health product distributors, veterinarians and
pharmaceutical companies from Abbott-owned distribution centers and public
warehouses. Outside the United States sales are made either directly to
customers or through distributors, depending on the market served. Competition
is primarily from chemical, animal health and agricultural companies.
Competition is based on numerous factors depending on the market served.
Competitive factors include product performance, quality, price, and
technological advantages.
 
TAP HOLDINGS INC.
 
    Under an agreement between Abbott and Takeda Chemical Industries, Ltd. of
Japan (Takeda), TAP Holdings Inc. (owned 50 percent by Abbott and 50 percent by
an affiliate of Takeda), together with its subsidiary, TAP Pharmaceuticals Inc.
(TAP), develops and markets pharmaceutical products in the United States. TAP
markets Lupron-Registered Trademark-, an LH-RH analog, and Lupron
Depot-Registered Trademark-, a sustained release form of
Lupron-Registered Trademark-, in the United States. Lupron-Registered Trademark-
and Lupron Depot-Registered Trademark- are used principally for the palliative
treatment of advanced prostate cancer and the treatment of endometriosis. TAP
also markets Prevacid-Registered Trademark- (lansoprazole), a proton pump
inhibitor, and has a co-promotion arrangement with Abbott for
Prevacid-Registered Trademark-. Its principal indications are for heartburn and
other symptoms associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), erosive
esophagitis, short-term treatment of duodenal ulcers, the maintenance of healed
erosive esophagitis and duodenal ulcers. Abbott has marketing rights to certain
Takeda products in select Latin American markets. Abbott also markets
Lupron-Registered Trademark-, Lupron Depot-Registered Trademark-, Lupron
Depot-Ped-Registered Trademark-, and Prevacid-Registered Trademark- in select
markets outside the United States.
 
    TAP's products are generally sold directly to physicians, retailers,
wholesalers, health care facilities, and government agencies. In most cases,
they are distributed from Abbott-owned distribution centers. Primary marketing
efforts for pharmaceutical products are directed toward securing the
prescription of TAP's brand of products by physicians. Certain products are
co-marketed with Abbott. Managed care purchasers, for example, health
maintenance organizations (HMOs) and pharmacy benefit managers, are increasingly
important customers. Competition is generally from pharmaceutical companies. A
significant aspect of competition is the search for technological innovations.
The introduction of new products by competitors and changes in medical practices
and procedures can result in product obsolescence. In addition, the substitution
of generic drugs for the brand prescribed has increased competitive pressures on
pharmaceutical products which are off patent.
 
            INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO ABBOTT'S BUSINESS IN GENERAL
 
SOURCES AND AVAILABILITY OF RAW MATERIALS
 
    Abbott purchases, in the ordinary course of business, necessary raw
materials and supplies essential to Abbott's operations from numerous suppliers
in the United States and overseas. There have been no recent significant
availability problems or supply shortages.
 
PATENTS, TRADEMARKS, AND LICENSES
 
    Abbott is aware of the desirability for patent and trademark protection for
its products. Accordingly, where possible, patents and trademarks are sought and
obtained for Abbott's products in the United States and all countries of major
marketing interest to Abbott. Abbott owns, has applications pending for, and is
licensed under a substantial number of patents. Principal trademarks and the
products they cover are discussed in the Narrative Description of Business on
pages 1 through 5. These, and various patents which
 
                                       5
<PAGE>
expire during the period 1999 to 2019, in the aggregate, are believed to be of
material importance in the operation of Abbott's business. Abbott believes that
no single patent, license, trademark (or related group of patents, licenses, or
trademarks), except for those related to clarithromycin, are material in
relation to Abbott's business as a whole. The original United States compound
patent covering clarithromycin is licensed from Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
of Tokyo, Japan, and will expire in 2005. In addition, the patents, licenses,
and trademarks related to Depakote-Registered Trademark- and
Hytrin-Registered Trademark- are significant for Abbott's Pharmaceutical
Products segment. The original United States product patents covering
Depakote-Registered Trademark- will expire in 2008. In the United States, the
original compound patent covering Hytrin-Registered Trademark- has expired.
Litigation involving Abbott's patents covering Depakote-Registered Trademark-
and Hytrin-Registered Trademark- is discussed in Legal Proceedings on pages 11
and 12.
 
    While it is not feasible to predict with certainty the date on which a
generic form of terazosin hydrochloride, the drug which Abbott sells under the
trademark Hytrin-Registered Trademark-, could become available in the United
States, management currently does not expect a generic form of terazosin
hydrochloride to become available before the end of the second quarter of 1999.
Abbott believes generic competition would adversely impact sales of
Hytrin-Registered Trademark-. In 1998, Abbott recorded United States sales of
Hytrin-Registered Trademark- of $542 million. Pursuant to the safe harbor
provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Abbott
cautions investors that the foregoing statements regarding generic terazosin
hydrochloride are forward-looking statements or projections and are subject to
risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from
those projected. These include developments in the pending litigation. Economic,
competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect
Abbott's operations are discussed in Exhibit 99.1.
 
SEASONAL ASPECTS, CUSTOMERS, BACKLOG, AND RENEGOTIATION
 
    There are no significant seasonal aspects to Abbott's business. The
incidence of certain infectious diseases which occur at various times in
different areas of the world does, however, affect the demand for Abbott's
anti-infective products. Orders for Abbott's products are generally filled on a
current basis, and order backlog is not material to Abbott's business. No single
customer accounted for sales equaling 10 percent or more of Abbott's
consolidated net sales. No material portion of Abbott's business is subject to
renegotiation of profits or termination of contracts at the election of the
government.
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
 
    Abbott spent $1,221,593,000 in 1998, $1,302,403,000 in 1997, and
$1,204,841,000 in 1996 on research to discover and develop new products and
processes and to improve existing products and processes. Abbott continues to
concentrate research expenditures on pharmaceutical and diagnostic products.
 
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
 
    Abbott believes that its operations comply in all material respects with
applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection. Regulations
under federal and state environmental laws impose stringent limitations on
emissions and discharges to the environment from various manufacturing
operations. Abbott's capital and operating expenditures for pollution control in
1998 were approximately $28 million and $49 million, respectively. Capital and
operating expenditures for pollution control are estimated to approximate $19
million and $54 million, respectively, in 1999.
 
    Abbott has been identified as one of many potentially responsible parties in
investigations and/or remediations at 21 locations in the United States and
Puerto Rico under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund. The aggregate costs of remediation
at these sites by all identified parties are uncertain but have been subject to
widely ranging estimates totaling as much as several hundred million dollars. In
many cases, Abbott believes that the actual costs will be lower than these
estimates, and the fraction for which Abbott may be responsible is
 
                                       6
<PAGE>
anticipated to be considerably less and will be paid out over a number of years.
Abbott may participate in the investigation or cleanup at these sites. Abbott is
also voluntarily investigating potential contamination at two Abbott-owned
sites, and has initiated remediation at four sites, in cooperation with the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or similar state agencies.
 
    While it is not feasible to predict with certainty the costs related to the
previously described investigation and cleanup activities, Abbott believes that
such costs, together with other expenditures to maintain compliance with
applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection, should not
have a material adverse effect on Abbott's financial position, cash flows, or
results of operations.
 
EMPLOYEES
 
    Abbott employed 56,236 persons as of December 31, 1998.
 
REGULATION
 
    The development, manufacture, sale, and distribution of Abbott's products
are subject to comprehensive government regulation. Government regulation by
various federal, state, and local agencies, which includes detailed inspection
of and controls over research and laboratory procedures, clinical
investigations, and manufacturing, marketing, sampling, distribution,
recordkeeping, storage, and disposal practices, substantially increases the
time, difficulty, and costs incurred in obtaining and maintaining the approval
to market newly developed and existing products. Government regulatory actions
can result in delay in the release of products, seizure or recall of products,
suspension or revocation of the authority necessary for their production and
sale, and other civil or criminal sanctions.
 
    In late 1998, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) suspended
its approval of the release of production lots of Abbott's pharmaceutical
product Abbokinase due to Current Good Manufacturing Practice concerns raised by
the FDA following inspections of Abbott and its raw material supplier. In
January 1999, after Abbott revised the product's labeling to add additional
warnings and the FDA issued a health care provider information sheet, the FDA
released certain lots that were under its review. The FDA subsequently
established new criteria for the release of additional lots. Abbott is
instituting changes to its procedures in response to the FDA. Abbott cannot
predict whether these changes will resolve FDA's concerns or the effect of this
matter on future sales of Abbokinase. During 1998, Abbott sold approximately
$277 million of Abbokinase, primarily in the United States.
 
    Continuing studies of the utilization, safety, and efficacy of health care
products and their components are being conducted by industry, government
agencies, and others. Such studies, which employ increasingly sophisticated
methods and techniques, can call into question the utilization, safety, and
efficacy of previously marketed products and in some cases have resulted, and
may in the future result, in the discontinuance of marketing of such products
and may give rise to claims for damages from persons who believe they have been
injured as a result of their use.
 
    The cost of human health care products continues to be a subject of
investigation and action by governmental agencies, legislative bodies, and
private organizations in the United States and other countries. In the United
States, most states have enacted generic substitution legislation requiring or
permitting a dispensing pharmacist to substitute a different manufacturer's
version of a pharmaceutical product for the one prescribed. Federal and state
governments continue to press efforts to reduce costs of Medicare and Medicaid
programs, including restrictions on amounts agencies will reimburse for the use
of products. In addition, the federal government follows a diagnosis-related
group (DRG) payment system for certain institutional services provided under
Medicare or Medicaid. The DRG system entitles a health care facility to a fixed
reimbursement based on discharge diagnoses rather than actual costs incurred in
patient treatment, thereby increasing the incentive for the facility to limit or
control expenditures for many health care products. Manufacturers must pay
certain statutorily-prescribed rebates on Medicaid purchases for reimbursement
on prescription drugs under state Medicaid plans. The Veterans Health Care Act
of
 
                                       7
<PAGE>
1992 requires manufacturers to extend additional discounts on pharmaceutical
products to various federal agencies, including the Department of Veterans
Affairs, Department of Defense, and Public Health Service entities and
institutions.
 
    In the United States, governmental cost-containment efforts have extended to
the federally funded Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants,
and Children (WIC). All states participate in WIC and have sought and obtained
rebates from manufacturers of infant formula whose products are used in the
program. Over the last five years, all of the states have conducted competitive
bidding for infant formula contracts which require the use of specific infant
formula products by the state WIC program. The Child Nutrition and WIC
Reauthorization Act of 1989 requires all states participating in WIC to engage
in competitive bidding or to use any other cost containment measure that yields
savings equal to or greater than the savings generated by a competitive bidding
system.
 
    Governmental regulatory agencies require prescription drug manufacturers to
pay fees. The FDA imposes substantial fees on various aspects of the approval,
manufacture, and sale of proprietary prescription drugs. The FDA's authority to
impose these fees was reauthorized by the Food and Drug Administration
Modernization Act of 1997.
 
    Abbott expects debate to continue during 1999 at both the federal and the
state level over the availability, method of delivery, and payment for health
care products and services. Abbott believes that if legislation is enacted, it
could have the effect of reducing prices, or reducing the rate of price
increases, for medical products and services.
 
    International operations are also subject to a significant degree of
government regulation. Many countries, directly or indirectly through
reimbursement limitations, control the selling price of most health care
products. Furthermore, many developing countries limit the importation of raw
materials and finished products. International regulations are having an impact
on United States regulations, as well. The International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) provides the criteria for meeting the regulations for
medical devices within the European Union. Abbott has made significant strides
in gaining ISO 9000 and European Norm 46000 certification for facilities that
manufacture devices for European markets. The FDA recently adopted regulations
governing the manufacture of medical devices that appear to encompass and exceed
the ISO's approach to regulating medical devices. The FDA's adoption of the
ISO's approach to regulation and other changes to the manner in which the FDA
regulates medical devices will increase the cost of compliance with those
regulations.
 
    Efforts to reduce health care costs are also being made in the private
sector. Health care providers have responded by instituting various cost
reduction and containment measures.
 
    It is not possible to predict the extent to which Abbott or the health care
industry in general might be affected by the matters discussed above.
 
                            INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS
 
    Abbott markets products in approximately 130 countries through affiliates
and distributors. Most of the products discussed in the preceding sections of
this report are also sold outside the United States. In addition, certain
products of a local nature and variations of product lines to meet local
regulatory requirements and marketing preferences are manufactured and marketed
to customers outside the United States. International operations are subject to
certain additional risks inherent in conducting business outside the United
States, including price and currency exchange controls, changes in currency
exchange rates, limitations on foreign participation in local enterprises,
expropriation, nationalization, and other governmental action.
 
                                       8
<PAGE>
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES
 
    Abbott's corporate offices are located at 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park,
Illinois 60064-6400. The locations of Abbott's principal plants are listed
below.
 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                        LOCATION                                   INDUSTRY SEGMENTS OF PRODUCTS PRODUCED
- --------------------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------------------
<S>                                                       <C>
Abbott Park, Illinois                                     Pharmaceutical Products, Diagnostic Products, and
                                                            Hospital Products
Abingdon, England                                         Diagnostic Products
Altavista, Virginia                                       Ross Products
Ashland, Ohio                                             Hospital Products
Austin, Texas                                             Hospital Products
Barceloneta, Puerto Rico                                  Pharmaceutical Products, Diagnostic Products, and
                                                            Chemical and Agricultural Products
Bedford, Massachusetts                                    Diagnostic Products
Brockville, Canada                                        International
Campoverde, Italy                                         International
Casa Grande, Arizona                                      Ross Products
Columbus, Ohio                                            Ross Products
Delkenheim, Germany                                       Diagnostic Products
Haina, San Cristoba, Dominican Republic                   Hospital Products
Irving, Texas                                             Diagnostic Products
Laurinburg, North Carolina                                Hospital Products
McPherson, Kansas                                         Hospital Products
Montreal, Canada                                          International
Morgan Hill, California                                   Hospital Products
North Chicago, Illinois                                   Pharmaceutical Products, Hospital Products, and Chemical
                                                            and Agricultural Products
Queenborough, England                                     International
Rocky Mount, North Carolina                               Hospital Products
Salt Lake City, Utah                                      Hospital Products
Santa Clara, California                                   Diagnostic Products
Sligo/Donegal/Cootehill/Finisklin, Ireland                Diagnostic Products and International
Sturgis, Michigan                                         Ross Products
St. Remy, France                                          International
Tokyo, Japan                                              Diagnostic Products
Zwolle, The Netherlands                                   International
</TABLE>
 
                                       9
<PAGE>
    In addition to the above, Abbott has manufacturing facilities in five other
locations in the United States, including Puerto Rico. Outside the United States
manufacturing facilities are located in 14 other countries. Abbott's facilities
are deemed suitable, provide adequate productive capacity, and are utilized at
normal and acceptable levels.
 
    In the United States, including Puerto Rico, Abbott owns 11 distribution
centers. Abbott also has 14 United States research and development facilities
located at: Abbott Park, Illinois; Ashland, Ohio; Bedford, Massachusetts;
Columbus, Ohio (two locations); Irving, Texas; Long Grove, Illinois; Madera,
California; McPherson, Kansas; Morgan Hill, California; Norcross, Georgia; North
Chicago, Illinois; Santa Clara, California; and San Diego, California. Outside
the United States, Abbott has research and development facilities in Argentina,
Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Japan, The Netherlands, South
Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom.
 
    The corporate offices, and those principal plants in the United States that
are listed above, are owned by Abbott or subsidiaries of Abbott. The remaining
manufacturing plants and all other facilities are owned or leased by Abbott or
subsidiaries of Abbott. There are no material encumbrances on the properties.
 
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
 
    Abbott is involved in various claims and legal proceedings, including (as of
January 31, 1999), one antitrust suit and five investigations in connection with
Abbott's sale and marketing of infant formula products, 134 antitrust suits and
two investigations in connection with Abbott's pricing of prescription
pharmaceuticals, two cases involving Abbott's patents for divalproex sodium, a
drug that Abbott sells under the trademark Depakote-Registered Trademark-, five
cases involving Abbott's patents for terazosin hydrochloride, a drug that Abbott
sells under the trademark Hytrin-Registered Trademark-, and one antitrust suit
involving Hytrin-Registered Trademark-.
 
    The infant formula antitrust cases allege that Abbott conspired with one or
more of its competitors to fix prices, restrain trade and monopolize the market
for infant formula in violation of state antitrust laws. The suits have been
brought on behalf of individuals and name Abbott and certain other infant
formula manufacturers as defendants. The cases sought treble damages, civil
penalties, and other relief. On November 7, 1997, the Louisiana District Court
dismissed the plaintiff's complaint in the case that was pending in Louisiana.
The plaintiffs have appealed that decision. The appellate court has certified
the questions raised in the appeal to the state supreme court for its
consideration. In 1997, a case purporting to be a statewide consumer class
action was filed in state court in St. Louis, Missouri. It was voluntarily
dismissed in December 1998. Investigations are being conducted by the Attorneys
General of the states of California, Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin. These matters are no longer considered a possible material legal
proceeding and, therefore, no further information will be given with respect to
them.
 
    As of January 31, 1999, 116 prescription pharmaceutical pricing antitrust
cases were pending in federal court and 18 were pending in state courts. The
prescription pharmaceutical pricing antitrust suits allege that various
pharmaceutical manufacturers and pharmaceutical wholesalers have conspired to
fix prices for prescription pharmaceuticals and/or to discriminate in pricing to
retail pharmacies by providing discounts to mail-order pharmacies, institutional
pharmacies, and HMOs in violation of state and federal antitrust laws. The suits
have been brought on behalf of individual consumers and retail pharmacies and
name both Abbott and certain other pharmaceutical manufacturers and
pharmaceutical wholesalers and at least one mail-order pharmacy company as
defendants. The cases seek treble damages, civil penalties and injunctive and
other relief. Abbott has filed or intends to file a response to each of the
complaints denying all substantive allegations. The federal cases are pending in
the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois under the
Multidistrict Litigation Rules as In re: Brand Name Prescription Drug Antitrust
Litigation, MDL 997. The state cases are pending in the following state courts:
Tuscaloosa County and Clarke County, Alabama; Alameda County, California;
Monterey County, California; San Francisco County, California (eight cases); San
Joaquin County, California; Johnson County, Kansas;
 
                                       10
<PAGE>
Prentiss County, Mississippi; Mecklenburg County, North Carolina; and Cocke
County and Davidson County, Tennessee. Abbott entered into settlement agreements
in twelve consumer lawsuits pending in the following jurisdictions: Arizona,
Florida, Kansas, Maine, Michigan, Minnesota (2), New York, North Carolina,
Tennessee, Washington, D.C., and Wisconsin. The court in each jurisdiction must
approve the agreement before it becomes final. Courts in Arizona, Florida,
Maine, Michigan, Minnesota (2), New York, Washington, D.C. and Wisconsin have
approved the settlement agreement. The investigations are being conducted by the
Attorney General of Illinois and the Federal Trade Commission.
 
    As of January 31, 1999, two cases were pending involving Abbott's patents
for divalproex sodium, a drug that Abbott sells under the trademark
Depakote-Registered Trademark-. On October 24, 1997, after having been notified
that TorPharm, a division of Apotex, Inc. ("TorPharm") had applied to the
Federal Food and Drug Administration (the "FDA") for approval for a generic
version of divalproex sodium, Abbott sued TorPharm in the United States District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois alleging patent infringement.
TorPharm contends that its product does not infringe Abbott's patents and that,
in any event, the patents are invalid and unenforceable. On August 28, 1992,
after having been notified that Alra Laboratories, Inc. ("Alra") had applied to
the FDA for approval for a generic version of divalproex sodium, Abbott sued
Alra in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
alleging patent infringement. Alra filed counterclaims alleging that Abbott
fraudulently delayed Alra's entry into the market for divalproex sodium and
seeking money damages. Alra contended that its product did not infringe Abbott's
patents and that, in any event, those patents were invalid and unenforceable.
Alra filed motions for summary judgment on the issues of infringement and
validity. Abbott filed a motion for summary judgment on the issue of
infringement. On October 20, 1997, the court granted Abbott's motion for summary
judgment and found that Alra's product infringes Abbott's patents. The court
denied Alra's motions for summary judgment on the issues of infringement and
patent invalidity and dismissed the lawsuit. Alra filed a motion for
reconsideration of the court's ruling. That motion was granted in part and
denied in part. The court has stayed its earlier rulings on validity and
infringement pending further proceedings.
 
    As of January 31, 1999, five cases involving Abbott's patents for terazosin
hydrochloride, a drug that Abbott sells under the trademark
Hytrin-Registered Trademark-, were pending in the United States District Court
for the Northern District of Illinois. Abbott has been separately notified first
by Geneva Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ("Geneva") in April 1996, and then by Novopharm
Limited ("Novopharm"), Invamed, Inc. ("Invamed"), Mylan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
("Mylan"), and Warner Chilcott, Inc. ("Warner") that these corporations had
applied to the Federal Food and Drug Administration for approval for a generic
version of terazosin hydrochloride. Abbott sued each of these corporations
alleging patent infringement. These lawsuits were filed on June 4, 1996, against
Geneva, on September 13, 1996, against Novopharm, on August 1, 1997, against
Mylan, on October 28, 1997, against Invamed and on April 6, 1998, against
Warner. These corporations contend that Abbott's patent which covers their
version of terazosin hydrochloride is invalid and unenforceable. Additionally,
in April 1996, Zenith Laboratories, Inc. ("Zenith") sued Abbott in the United
States District Court for the District of New Jersey alleging that Abbott had
engaged in unfair competition, abuse of process, tortious interference with
prospective economic advantage, and fraud in attempting to protect Hytrin from
generic competition. Zenith sought money damages and a declaration that certain
of Abbott's patents covering terazosin hydrochloride are invalid. Abbott filed
counterclaims alleging patent infringement. On March 31, 1998, Abbott and Zenith
reached an agreement that resolved the litigation between the parties. In the
settlement, Zenith acknowledged the validity of Abbott's terazosin hydrochloride
patents and agreed to refrain from selling a generic version of terazosin
hydrochloride until the expiration of one of Abbott's patents for terazosin
hydrochloride (U.S. Patent No. 4,251,532). On April 1, 1998, Abbott and Geneva
reached an agreement under which Geneva will not market its Food and Drug
Administration approved generic terazosin hydrochloride products until
resolution of the pending litigation between the parties. Abbott agreed to make
quarterly payments to Zenith and monthly payments to Geneva until the date on
which they may enter the market for terazosin hydrochloride under their
agreements. Both Zenith and Geneva would be free to enter the market for
terazosin hydrochloride
 
                                       11
<PAGE>
in the United States, if certain of Abbott's patents for terazosin hydrochloride
were determined to be invalid and if another company legally enters the generic
market in the United States. The Geneva, Invamed, and Novopharm cases were all
pending before the same judge, who, on September 1, 1998, entered a judgment in
each of those cases ruling that the Abbott patent at issue in those cases is
invalid. Abbott has appealed these rulings. On November 19, 1998, the judge
hearing the Warner case granted Warner's motion for summary judgment applying
the ruling issued September 1 in the Geneva, Novopharm and Invamed cases to the
Warner case as well. Abbott has appealed this ruling. Warner has voluntarily
dismissed its counterclaims that had alleged that Abbott's conduct with respect
to Hytrin-Registered Trademark- violated the antitrust laws. Mylan has also
filed a motion for summary judgment seeking to have the ruling issued September
1 in the Geneva, Novopharm and Invamed cases applied in its case, as well.
 
    On December 18, 1998, Louisiana Wholesale Drug Co. sued Abbott, Geneva and
Zenith in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida
alleging that Abbott's agreements with Geneva and Zenith regarding terazosin
hydrochloride violate the federal antitrust laws. The case purports to be a
class action and seeks actual damages, treble damages, civil penalties, and
other relief. Abbott intends to file a response denying all substantive
allegations.
 
    While it is not feasible to predict the outcome of such pending claims,
proceedings, and investigations with certainty, management is of the opinion
that their ultimate disposition should not have a material adverse effect on
Abbott's financial position, cash flows, or results of operations.
 
ITEM 4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS
 
    None.
 
                                       12
<PAGE>
                      EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT
 
    Officers of Abbott are elected annually by the board of directors at the
first meeting held after the annual shareholders meeting. Each officer holds
office until a successor has been duly elected and qualified or until the
officer's death, resignation, or removal. Vacancies may be filled at any meeting
of the board. Any officer may be removed by the board of directors when, in its
judgment, removal would serve the best interests of Abbott.
 
    Current corporate officers, and their ages as of March 1, 1999, are listed
below. The officers' principal occupations and employment from January 1994 to
March 1, 1999 and the dates of their first election as officers of Abbott are
also shown. Unless otherwise stated, employment was by Abbott for the period
indicated. There are no family relationships between any corporate officers or
directors.
 
MILES D. WHITE**, 43
 
    1994 -- Vice President, Diagnostic Systems and Operations.
 
    1994 to 1998 -- Senior Vice President, Diagnostics Operations.
 
    1998 to 1999 -- Executive Vice President and Director.
 
    1999 to present -- Chief Executive Officer and Director.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
ROBERT L. PARKINSON, JR.** 48
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Senior Vice President, Chemical and Agricultural Products.
 
    1995 to 1998 -- Senior Vice President, International Operations.
 
    1998 to 1999 -- Executive Vice President and Director.
 
    1999 to present -- President, Chief Operating Officer and Director.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1989.
 
JOY A. AMUNDSON**, 44
 
    1994 -- Vice President, Corporate Hospital Marketing.
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Vice President, Abbott HealthSystems.
 
    1995 to 1998 -- Senior Vice President, Chemical and Agricultural Products.
 
    1998 to present -- Senior Vice President, Ross Products.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1990.
 
                                       13
<PAGE>
THOMAS D. BROWN**, 50
 
    1994 to 1998 -- Vice President, Diagnostics Commercial Operations.
 
    1998 to present -- Senior Vice President, Diagnostics Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
GARY P. COUGHLAN**, 55
 
    1994 to present -- Senior Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial
                       Officer.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1990.
 
JOSE M. DE LASA**, 57
 
    1994 -- Vice President and Associate General Counsel, Bristol-Myers Squibb
            Company (Health and personal care products company).
 
    1994 -- Vice President, Secretary and Associate General Counsel,
            Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
 
    1994 to present -- Senior Vice President, Secretary and General Counsel.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1994.
 
WILLIAM G. DEMPSEY **, 47
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President and General Manager, Abbott
                    Critical Care Systems.
 
    1995 to 1996 -- Divisional Vice President, Hospital Products Business Sector
                    Sales.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Vice President, Hospital Products Business Sector.
 
    1998 to present -- Senior Vice President, Chemical and Agricultural
                       Products.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1996.
 
RICHARD A. GONZALEZ**, 45
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President and General Manager, U.S. and
                    Canada, Diagnostic Products.
 
    1995 to 1998 -- Vice President, Abbott HealthSystems.
 
    1998 to present -- Senior Vice President, Hospital Products.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1995.
 
ARTHUR J. HIGGINS**, 42
 
    1994 -- Regional Director, Europe, Africa, and Middle East.
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President, Commercial Operations, Abbott
                    International Division.
 
    1995 to 1996 -- Divisional Vice President, Pacific, Asia, and Africa
                    Operations.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Vice President, Pacific, Asia, and Africa Operations.
 
    1998 to present -- Senior Vice President, Pharmaceutical Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1996.
 
                                       14
<PAGE>
THOMAS M. WASCOE**, 52
 
    1994 to 1999 -- Divisional Vice President, Human Resources, Diagnostics
                    Operations.
 
    1999 to present -- Senior Vice President, Human Resources.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1999.
 
JOSEF WENDLER**, 49
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Vice President, Pacific, Asia, and Africa Operations.
 
    1995 to 1998 -- Vice President, European Operations.
 
    1998 to present -- Senior Vice President, International Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
CATHERINE V. BABINGTON**, 46
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Director, Corporate Communications.
 
    1995 to present -- Vice President, Investor Relations and Public Affairs.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1995.
 
PATRICK J. BALTHROP, 42
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President and Sector General Manager,
                    Diagnostic Products.
 
    1995 to 1996 -- Divisional Vice President and General Manager, U.S. and
                    Canada, Diagnostic Products.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Vice President, Diagnostics Operations, U.S. and Canada.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Diagnostics Commercial Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1996.
 
MARK E. BARMAK, 57
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President and Associate General Counsel,
                    Litigation.
 
    1995 to present -- Vice President, Litigation and Government Affairs.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1995.
 
CHRISTOPHER B. BEGLEY**, 46
 
    1994 to 1996 -- Vice President, Hospital Products Business Sector.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Vice President, MediSense Operations.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Abbott HealthSystems.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
                                       15
<PAGE>
DOUGLAS C. BRYANT, 41
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Regional Sales Manager, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1995 to 1997 -- General Manager, United Kingdom and Ireland, Diagnostics
                    Division.
 
    1997 to 1998 -- Commercial Director, Asia and Pacific, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Diagnostics Operations, Asia and Pacific.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1998.
 
GARY R. BYERS**, 57
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President, Internal Audit.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
THOMAS F. CHEN, 49
 
    1994 -- General Manager, Korea and Taiwan.
 
    1994 to 1996 -- General Manager Taiwan and People's Republic of China Task
                    Force.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Regional Director, Taiwan and People's Republic of China.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Pacific, Asia, and Africa Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1998.
 
KENNETH W. FARMER**, 54
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President, Management Information Services and
                       Administration.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1985.
 
EDWARD J. FIORENTINO, 40
 
    1994 -- Business Unit Director, Antimicrobials, Pharmaceuticals Division.
 
    1994 to 1998 -- Divisional Vice President, Marketing, Pharmaceuticals
                    Division.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Pharmaceutical Products, Marketing and
                       Sales.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1998.
 
THOMAS C. FREYMAN**, 44
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President and Treasurer.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1991.
 
STEPHEN R. FUSSELL, 41
 
    1994 to 1996 -- Vice President, Total Compensation, Nestle USA (diversified
                    food company).
 
    1996 to 1999 -- Divisional Vice President, Compensation and Benefits.
 
    1999 to present -- Vice President, Compensation and Development.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1999.
 
                                       16
<PAGE>
DAVID B. GOFFREDO, 44
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President, Pharmaceutical Products Sales and
                    Marketing.
 
    1995 to 1998 -- Vice President, Pharmaceutical Products, Marketing and
                    Sales.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, European Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1995.
 
GUILLERMO A. HERRERA, 45
 
    1994 -- Regional Director, Europe, Abbott International.
 
    1994 -- General Manager, Abbott Spain and Portugal.
 
    1994 to 1996 -- Area Vice President, Latin America.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Vice President, Latin America Operations.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Latin America and Canada Operations.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1996.
 
JAY B. JOHNSTON, 55
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President, Diagnostic Assays and Systems.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
JAMES J. KOZIARZ, 50
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President, Diagnostic Products Research and
                       Development.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
JOHN M. LEONARD, 41
 
    1994 to 1996 -- Venture Head, Pharmaceutical Products Research and
                    Development.
 
    1996 to 1997 -- Therapeutic Area Venture Head, Pharmaceutical Products
                    Research and Development.
 
    1997 to 1999 -- Divisional Vice President, Pharmaceutical Development,
                    Pharmaceutical Products Research and Development.
 
    1999 to present -- Vice President, Pharmaceutical Development.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1999.
 
JOHN F. LUSSEN**, 57
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President, Taxes.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1985.
 
                                       17
<PAGE>
EDWARD L. MICHAEL, 42
 
    1994 -- Business Unit Manager, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1995 to 1996 -- Director, Area Operations and Scientific Development.
 
    1997 to present -- Vice President, Diagnostics Operations, Europe, Africa,
                       and Middle East.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1997.
 
DANIEL W. NORBECK, 40
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Senior Project Leader, Pharmaceutical Products Research and
                    Development.
 
    1995 to 1998 -- Divisional Vice President, Area Head, Pharmaceutical
                    Products Research and Development.
 
    1998 to 1999 -- Divisional Vice President, Discovery, Pharmaceutical
                    Products Research and Development.
 
    1999 to present -- Vice President, Pharmaceutical Discovery.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1999.
 
THEODORE A. OLSON**, 60
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President and Controller.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1988.
 
WILLIAM H. STADTLANDER, 53
 
    1994 to present -- Vice President, Ross Medical Nutritional Products.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1993.
 
MARCIA A. THOMAS **, 51
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President and General Manager, Infectious
                    Diseases Diagnostics.
 
    1995 to 1996 -- Divisional Vice President, Quality Assurance and Regulatory
                    Affairs, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1996 to present -- Vice President, Quality Assurance and Regulatory Affairs.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1996.
 
STEVEN J. WEGER, JR.**, 54
 
    1994 to 1996 -- Divisional Vice President, Strategic Planning and Technology
                    Assessment, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1996 to present -- Vice President, Corporate Planning and Development.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1996.
 
                                       18
<PAGE>
SUSAN M. WIDNER, 42
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Business Unit Manager, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1995 to 1996 -- Director, Venture Marketing, Diagnostics Division.
 
    1996 to 1998 -- Divisional Vice President, Worldwide Marketing, Diagnostics
                    Division.
 
    1998 to present -- Vice President, Diagnostics Operations, U.S. and Canada.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1998.
 
LANCE B. WYATT**, 54
 
    1994 to 1995 -- Divisional Vice President, Quality Assurance and Regulatory
                    Affairs, Pharmaceutical Division.
 
    1995 to present -- Vice President, Corporate Engineering.
 
    Elected Corporate Officer -- 1995.
 
- ------------------------
 
** Pursuant to Item 401(b) of Regulation S-K, Abbott has identified these
   persons as "executive officers" within the meaning of Item 401(b).
 
                                       19
<PAGE>
                                    PART II
 
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR THE REGISTRANT'S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER
        MATTERS
 
PRINCIPAL MARKET
 
    The principal market for Abbott's common shares is the New York Stock
Exchange. Shares are also listed on the Chicago Stock Exchange and the Pacific
Exchange and are traded on the Boston, Cincinnati, and Philadelphia Exchanges.
Outside the United States, Abbott's shares are listed on the London Stock
Exchange and the Swiss Stock Exchange.
 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                   MARKET PRICE PER SHARE
                                            -------------------------------------
          <S>                               <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>
                                                  1998                1997
                                            -----------------   -----------------
                                             HIGH       LOW      HIGH       LOW
                                            -------   -------   -------   -------
          First Quarter...................   39 7/16   32 1/2    30 1/4    24 7/8
          Second Quarter..................   42 11/16  34 7/8    34 7/16   26 7/16
          Third Quarter...................   45 11/16  36 5/8    34 1/4    29 3/8
          Fourth Quarter..................   50 1/16   39        34 5/8    28 1/2
</TABLE>
 
    Market prices are as reported by the New York Stock Exchange composite
transaction reporting system. Pre-split prices have been adjusted to reflect the
May 1998 stock split.
 
SHAREHOLDERS
 
    There were 107,209 shareholders of record of Abbott common shares as of
December 31, 1998.
 
DIVIDENDS
 
    Quarterly dividends of $.15 per share and $.135 per share were declared on
common shares in 1998 and 1997, respectively after reflecting the May 1998 stock
split.
 
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
 
    Incorporated herein by reference for the years 1994 through 1998 are the
applicable portions of the section captioned "Summary of Selected Financial
Data" of the 1998 Annual Report.
 
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS
        OF OPERATIONS
 
    Incorporated herein by reference is management's discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations for the years 1998, 1997, and 1996
found under the section captioned "Financial Review" of the 1998 Annual Report.
 
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
 
    Incorporated herein by reference is the section captioned "Financial
Instruments and Risk Management" of the 1998 Annual Report.
 
                                       20
<PAGE>
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
 
    Incorporated herein by reference are the portions of the 1998 Annual Report
captioned Consolidated Statement of Earnings, Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows, Consolidated Balance Sheet, Consolidated Statement of Shareholders'
Investment, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and Report of
Independent Public Accountants (which contains the related report of Arthur
Andersen LLP dated January 14, 1999.) Data relating to quarterly results are
found in Note 11.
 
ITEM 9. DISAGREEMENTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
 
    None.
 
                                    PART III
 
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT
 
    Incorporated herein by reference are "Committees of the Board of Directors"
and "Information Concerning Nominees for Directors" found in the 1999 Abbott
Laboratories Proxy Statement ("1999 Proxy Statement"). Also incorporated herein
by reference is the text found under the caption, Executive Officers of The
Registrant on pages 13 through 19.
 
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
 
    The material in the 1999 Proxy Statement under the heading "Executive
Compensation," other than the Report of the Compensation Committee, the
Performance Graph, and Security Ownership of Executive Officers and Directors is
hereby incorporated by reference.
 
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
 
    Incorporated herein by reference is the text found under the caption
"Information Concerning Security Ownership" and the material under the heading
"Security Ownership of Executive Officers and Directors" in the 1999 Proxy
Statement.
 
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
 
    None.
 
                                    PART IV
 
ITEM 14. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES, AND REPORTS ON FORM 8-K
 
    (a) DOCUMENTS FILED AS PART OF THIS FORM 10-K.
 
    1.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:  The Consolidated Financial Statements for the
years ended December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996 and the related report of Arthur
Andersen LLP dated January 14, 1999, appearing under the portions of the 1998
Annual Report captioned Consolidated Statement of Earnings, Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows, Consolidated Balance Sheet, Consolidated Statement of
Shareholders' Investment, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and Report
of Independent Public Accountants, respectively, are incorporated by reference
in response to Item 14(a)1. With the exception of the portions of the 1998
Annual Report specifically incorporated herein by reference, such Report shall
not be deemed filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K or otherwise
deemed subject to the liabilities of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934.
 
                                       21
<PAGE>
    2.  FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES:  The required financial statement
schedules are found on the pages indicated below. These schedules should be read
in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements in the 1998 Annual
Report:
 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
SCHEDULES                                                                                         PAGE NO.
- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  -------------
<S>                                                                                             <C>
Valuation and Qualifying Accounts (Schedule II)                                                          25
Schedules I, III, IV, and V are not submitted because they are not applicable or not required.
Supplemental Report of Independent Public Accountants                                                    26
Individual Financial Statements of the registrant have been omitted pursuant to Rule 3.05,
 paragraph (1) of Regulation S-X.
</TABLE>
 
    3.  EXHIBITS REQUIRED BY ITEM 601 OF REGULATION S-K:  The information called
for by this paragraph is incorporated herein by reference to the Exhibit Index
on pages 28, 29 and 30 of this Form 10-K.
 
    (b) REPORTS ON FORM 8-K DURING THE QUARTER ENDED DECEMBER 31, 1998:
 
    No reports on Form 8-K were filed during the quarter ended December 31,
1998.
 
    (c) EXHIBITS FILED (SEE EXHIBIT INDEX ON PAGES 28, 29 AND 30).
 
    (d) FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES FILED (PAGE 25).
 
                                       22
<PAGE>
                                   SIGNATURES
 
    Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, Abbott Laboratories has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
                                          ABBOTT LABORATORIES
 
                                          By /s/ MILES D. WHITE
                                            ------------------------------------
                                             Miles D. White
                                             Chief Executive Officer
 
                                           Date: February 12, 1999
 
    Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of Abbott
Laboratories on February 12, 1999 in the capacities indicated below.
 
/s/ DUANE L. BURNHAM
- -------------------------------------------
Duane L. Burnham
Chairman of the Board
and Director
 
/s/ MILES D. WHITE
- -------------------------------------------
Miles D. White
Chief Executive Officer and Director
(principal executive officer)
 
/s/ ROBERT L. PARKINSON, JR.
- -------------------------------------------
Robert L. Parkinson, Jr.
President, Chief Operating Officer
and Director
 
/s/ GARY P. COUGHLAN
- -------------------------------------------
Gary P. Coughlan
Senior Vice President, Finance and
Chief Financial Officer
(principal financial officer)
 
/s/ THEODORE A. OLSON
- -------------------------------------------
Theodore A. Olson
Vice President and Controller
(principal accounting officer)
 
/s/ K. FRANK AUSTEN, M.D.
- -------------------------------------------
K. Frank Austen, M.D.
Director
 
/s/ H. LAURANCE FULLER
- -------------------------------------------
H. Laurance Fuller
Director
 
/s/ DAVID A. JONES
- -------------------------------------------
David A. Jones
Director
 
/s/ DAVID A. L. OWEN
- -------------------------------------------
David A. L. Owen
Director
 
/s/ BOONE POWELL, JR.
- -------------------------------------------
Boone Powell, Jr.
Director
 
/s/ A. BARRY RAND
- -------------------------------------------
A. Barry Rand
Director
 
                                       23
<PAGE>
/s/ W. ANN REYNOLDS
- -------------------------------------------
W. Ann Reynolds
Director
 
/s/ ROY S. ROBERTS
- -------------------------------------------
Roy S. Roberts
Director
 
/s/ WILLIAM D. SMITHBURG
- -------------------------------------------
William D. Smithburg
Director
 
/s/ JOHN R. WALTER
- -------------------------------------------
John R. Walter
Director
 
/s/ WILLIAM L. WEISS
- -------------------------------------------
William L. Weiss
Director
 
                                       24
<PAGE>
                      ABBOTT LABORATORIES AND SUBSIDIARIES
                SCHEDULE II -- VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
             FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 1998, 1997, AND 1996
                                  (UNAUDITED)
 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                            AMOUNTS
                  ALLOWANCES FOR DOUBTFUL                     BALANCE AT    PROVISIONS    CHARGED OFF
                     ACCOUNTS AND SALES                        BEGINNING    CHARGED TO      NET OF     BALANCE AT
                         DEDUCTIONS                             OF YEAR      INCOME(a)    RECOVERIES   END OF YEAR
- ------------------------------------------------------------  -----------  -------------  -----------  -----------
<S>                                                           <C>          <C>            <C>          <C>
        1998................................................     167,406        41,441       (17,895)     190,952
        1997................................................     153,424        28,193       (14,211)     167,406
        1996................................................     157,990         7,389       (11,955)     153,424
</TABLE>
 
(a) Represents provisions related to allowances for doubtful accounts and net
    change in the allowances for sales deductions.
 
                                       25
<PAGE>
             SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
 
To Abbott Laboratories:
 
    We have audited in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards,
the financial statements included in Abbott's Annual Report incorporated by
reference in this Form 10-K, and have issued our report thereon dated January
14, 1999. Our audits were made for the purpose of forming an opinion on those
statements taken as a whole. Schedule II is the responsibility of Abbott's
management, is presented for purposes of complying with the Securities and
Exchange Commission's rules, and is not part of the basic financial statements.
This schedule has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the
audits of the basic financial statements and, in our opinion, fairly states in
all material respects the financial data required to be set forth therein in
relation to the basic financial statements taken as a whole.
 
                                          ARTHUR ANDERSEN LLP
 
Chicago, Illinois
January 14, 1999
<PAGE>
                   CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
 
    As independent public accountants, we hereby consent to the incorporation by
reference of the following into Abbott's previously filed S-8 Registration
Statements 33-4368 for the Abbott Laboratories 1986 Incentive Stock Program,
33-39798 for the Abbott Laboratories 1991 Incentive Stock Program, 333-09071,
333-43381 and 333-69547 for the Abbott Laboratories 1996 Incentive Stock
Program, 333-13091 for the Abbott Laboratories Ashland Union 401(k) Plan and
Trust, and 33-26685, 33-51585, 33-56897, 33-65127, 333-19511, 333-43383, and
333-69579 for the Abbott Laboratories Stock Retirement Plan and Trust and into
Abbott's previously filed S-3 Registration Statements 33-50253, 333-06155,
333-63481, and 333-65601:
 
    1.  Our supplemental report dated January 14, 1999 included in this Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 1998; and
 
    2.  Our report dated January 14, 1999 incorporated by reference in this
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 1998.
 
                                          ARTHUR ANDERSEN LLP
 
Chicago, Illinois
March 9, 1999
 
                                       27
<PAGE>
                                 EXHIBIT INDEX
                              ABBOTT LABORATORIES
                                 ANNUAL REPORT
                                   FORM 10-K
                                      1998
 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
   10-K
 EXHIBIT
  TABLE
 ITEM NO.
- ----------
<S>         <C>
     3.1    * Articles of Incorporation-Abbott Laboratories, filed as Exhibit 3.1 to the Abbott Laboratories
              Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the Quarter ended March 31, 1998.
 
     3.2    Corporate By-Laws-Abbott Laboratories.
 
     4.1    * Indenture dated as of October 1, 1993, between Abbott Laboratories and Harris Trust and Savings Bank,
              filed as Exhibit 4.1 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30,
              1993, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.2    * Form of 5.6% Note issued pursuant to the Indenture filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Abbott Laboratories
              Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.3    * Form of Medium-Term Note, Series A (Fixed Rate) to be issued pursuant to the Indenture filed as
              Exhibit 4.3 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on
              Form 10-Q.
 
     4.4    * Form of Medium-Term Note, Series A (Floating Rate) to be issued pursuant to the Indenture filed as
              Exhibit 4.4 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on
              Form 10-Q.
 
     4.5    * Resolution of Abbott's Board of Directors filed as Exhibit 4.5 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly
              Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.6    * Actions of the Authorized Officers with respect to Abbott's $200,000,000 5.6% Notes filed as Exhibit
              4.6 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on Form
              10-Q.
 
     4.7    * Actions of the Authorized Officers with respect to Abbott's Medium-Term Notes, Series A filed as
              Exhibit 4.7 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on
              Form 10-Q.
 
     4.8    * Officers' Certificate and Company Order with respect to Abbott's $200,000,000 5.6% Notes filed as
              Exhibit 4.8 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1993, on
              Form 10-Q.
 
     4.9    * Form of 6.8% Note issued pursuant to Indenture filed as Exhibit 4.9 to the 1995 Abbott Laboratories
              Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.10   * Actions of Authorized Officers with respect to Abbott's $150,000,000 6.8% Notes filed as Exhibit 4.10
              to the 1995 Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.11   * Officers' Certificate and Company Order with respect to Abbott's $150,000,000 6.8% Notes filed as
              Exhibit 4.11 to the 1995 Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.12   * Resolution of Abbott's Board of Directors relating to the 6.4% Notes filed as Exhibit 4.12 to the 1996
              Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.13   * Form of $50,000,000 6.4% Note issued pursuant to Indenture filed as Exhibit 4.13 to the 1996 Abbott
              Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.14   * Form of $200,000,000 6.4% Note issued pursuant to Indenture filed as Exhibit 4.14 to the 1996 Abbott
              Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
</TABLE>
 
                                       28
<PAGE>
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
   10-K
 EXHIBIT
  TABLE
 ITEM NO.
- ----------
<S>         <C>
     4.15   * Actions of Authorized Officers with respect to Abbott's 6.4% Notes filed as Exhibit 4.15 to the 1996
              Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.16   * Officers' Certificate and Company Order with respect to Abbott's 6.4% Notes filed as Exhibit 4.16 to
              the 1996 Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
     4.17   * Form of $200,000,000 6.0% Note issued pursuant to Indenture filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Abbott
              Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended June 30, 1998, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.18   * Actions of Authorized Officers with respect to Abbott's 6.0% Note filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the Abbott
              Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended June 30, 1998, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.19   * Officers' Certificate and Company Order with respect to Abbott's 6.0% Note filed as Exhibit 4.4 to the
              Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended June 30, 1998, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.20   * Form of $200,000,000 5.40% Note issued pursuant to Indenture filed as Exhibit 4.2 to the Abbott
              Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1998, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.21   * Actions of Authorized Officers with respect to Abbott's 5.40% Note filed as Exhibit 4.3 to the Abbott
              Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1998, on Form 10-Q.
 
     4.22   * Officers' Certificate and Company Order with respect to Abbott's 5.40% Note filed as Exhibit 4.4 to
              the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly Report for the Quarter ended September 30, 1998, on Form 10-Q.
 
            Other debt instruments are omitted in accordance with Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A) of Regulation S-K. Copies
              of such agreements will be furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission upon request.
 
    10.1    * Supplemental Plan Abbott Laboratories Extended Disability Plan, filed as an exhibit (pages 50-51) to
              the 1992 Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.**
 
    10.2    * The Abbott Laboratories 1986 Incentive Stock Program filed as Exhibit 10.2 to the 1997 Abbott
              Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.**
 
    10.3    * The Abbott Laboratories 1991 Incentive Stock Program filed as Exhibit 10.3 to the 1997 Abbott
              Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.**
 
    10.4    * Consulting agreement between Abbott Laboratories and K. Frank Austen, M.D. dated, December 15, 1997
              filed as Exhibit 10.4 to the 1997 Abbott Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.**
 
    10.5    * Abbott Laboratories 401(k) Supplemental Plan, filed as Exhibit 10.7 to the Abbott Laboratories 1993
              Annual Report on Form 10-K.**
 
    10.6    * Abbott Laboratories Supplemental Pension Plan filed as Exhibit 10.1 to the Abbott Laboratories
              Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 1998.**
 
    10.7    * The 1986 Abbott Laboratories Management Incentive Plan filed as Exhibit 10.1 to the Abbott
              Laboratories Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 1997.**
 
    10.8    Abbott Laboratories Non-Employee Directors' Fee Plan.**
 
    10.9    * The Abbott Laboratories 1996 Incentive Stock Program filed as Exhibit 10.9 to the 1997 Abbott
              Laboratories Annual Report on Form 10-K.**
</TABLE>
 
                                       29
<PAGE>
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
   10-K
 EXHIBIT
  TABLE
 ITEM NO.
- ----------
<S>         <C>
    10.10   * 1998 Abbott Performance Incentive Plan filed as Exhibit 10.1 to the Abbott Laboratories Quarterly
              Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 1998. **
 
    10.11   Consulting arrangement between Abbott Laboratories and Duane L. Burnham dated, December 23, 1998.**
 
    12      Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
 
    13      The portions of the Abbott Laboratories Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 1998 captioned
              Consolidated Statement of Earnings, Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows, Consolidated Balance Sheet,
              Consolidated Statement of Shareholders' Investment, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Report
              of Independent Public Accountants, Financial Instruments and Risk Management, Financial Review, and
              the applicable portions of the section captioned Summary of Financial Data for the years 1994 through
              1998.
 
    21      Subsidiaries of Abbott Laboratories.
 
    23      Consent of Independent Public Accountants.
 
    27      Financial Data Schedule.
 
    99.1    Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.
 
            The 1999 Abbott Laboratories Proxy Statement will be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
              under separate cover on or about March 9, 1999.
</TABLE>
 
- ------------------------
 
*   Incorporated herein by reference. Commission file number 1-2189.
 
**  Denotes management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to
    be filed as an exhibit hereto.
 
    Abbott will furnish copies of any of the above exhibits to a shareholder
upon written request to the Corporate Secretary, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott
Park Road, Abbott Park, Illinois 60064-6400.
 
                                       30
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-3.2
<SEQUENCE>2
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 3.2 CORPORATE BY-LAWS
<TEXT>

<PAGE>

                                                           Exhibit 3.2

                                      BY-LAWS
                                          
                                         OF
                                          
                                ABBOTT LABORATORIES










                         Adopted by the Board of Directors
                           of Abbott Laboratories at the
                           Annual Meeting, April 11, 1963
                 as amended and restated, effective October 9, 1998

<PAGE>

                           BY-LAWS OF ABBOTT LABORATORIES


                                     ARTICLE I

                                      OFFICES

     The principal office of the Corporation in the State of Illinois shall 
be located at the intersection of State Routes 43 and 137 in the County of 
Lake. The Corporation may have such other offices either within or without 
the State of Illinois as the business of the Corporation may require from 
time to time.

     The registered office of the Corporation may be, but need not be, 
identical with the principal office in the State of Illinois.  The address of 
the registered office may be changed from time to time by the Board of 
Directors.

                                     ARTICLE II

                                    SHAREHOLDERS

     SECTION 1.  ANNUAL MEETING; TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS, NOMINATION OF 
DIRECTORS.  The annual meeting of the shareholders shall be held in the month 
of April in each year on such date and at such time as the Board of Directors 
shall provide.  The meeting shall be held for the purpose of electing 
Directors and for the transaction of such other business as is properly 
brought before the meeting in accordance with these By-Laws.  If the election 
of Directors shall not be held on the day designated for any annual meeting, 
or at any adjournment thereof, the Board of Directors shall cause the 
election to be held at a meeting of the shareholders as soon thereafter as 
conveniently may be.

     To be properly brought before the meeting, business must be either (a) 
specified in the notice of meeting (or any supplement thereto) given by or at 
the direction of the Board of Directors, (b) otherwise properly brought 
before the meeting by or at the direction of the Board of Directors or (c) 
otherwise properly brought before the meeting by a shareholder.  In addition 
to any other applicable requirements, for business to be properly brought 
before an annual meeting by a shareholder, the shareholder must have given 
timely notice thereof in writing to the Secretary.  To be timely, a 
shareholder's notice must be delivered to or mailed and received at the 
principal office of the Corporation, not earlier than October 1 nor later 
than the first business day of January immediately prior to the date of the 
meeting; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that in the event that the date of such meeting 
is not in the month of April and less than sixty-five days' notice or prior 
public disclosure of the date of the meeting is given or made to 
shareholders, notice by the shareholder to be timely must be so received not 
later than the close of business on the fifteenth day following the day on 
which such notice of the date of the annual meeting was mailed or such public 
disclosure was made, whichever first occurs.  A shareholder's notice to the 
Secretary shall set forth as to each matter the shareholder proposes to bring 
before the annual meeting (i) a brief 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 2


description of the business desired to be brought before the annual meeting 
and the reasons for conducting such business at the annual meeting, (ii) the 
name and record address of the shareholder proposing such business, (iii) the 
class and number of shares of the Corporation which are beneficially owned by 
the shareholder and (iv) any material interest of the shareholder in such 
business.

     Notwithstanding anything in these By-Laws to the contrary, no business 
shall be conducted at the annual meeting except in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in this Section 1, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that nothing in 
this Section 1 shall be deemed to preclude discussion by any shareholder of 
any business properly brought before the annual meeting.

     The Chairman of an annual meeting shall, if the facts warrant, determine 
and declare to the meeting that business was not properly brought before the 
meeting in accordance with the provisions of this Section 1, and if he should 
so determine, he shall so declare to the meeting and such business not 
properly brought before the meeting shall not be transacted.

     Only persons who are nominated in accordance with the following 
procedures shall be eligible for election as directors.  Nominations of 
persons for election to the Board of Directors of the Corporation at the 
annual meeting may be made at such annual meeting of shareholders by or at 
the direction of the Board of Directors, by any nominating committee or 
person appointed by the Board of Directors, or by any shareholder of the 
Corporation entitled to vote for the election of directors at such meeting 
who complies with the notice procedures set forth in this Section 1.  Such 
nominations, other than those made by or at the direction of the Board of 
Directors or by a committee or person appointed by the Board of Directors, 
shall be made pursuant to timely notice in writing to the Secretary.  To be 
timely, a shareholder's notice shall be delivered to or mailed and received 
at the principal office of the Corporation not earlier than October 1 nor 
later than the first business day of January immediately prior to the date of 
the meeting; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that in the event that the date of such 
meeting is not in the month of April and less than sixty-five days' notice or 
prior public disclosure of the date of the meeting is given or made to 
shareholders, notice by the shareholder to be timely must be so received not 
later than the close of business on the fifteenth day following the day on 
which such notice of the date of the meeting was mailed or such public 
disclosure was made, whichever first occurs.  Such shareholder's notice to 
the Secretary shall set forth:  (a) as to each person whom the shareholder 
proposes to nominate for election or re-election as a director, (i) the name, 
age, business address and residence address of the person, (ii) the principal 
occupation or employment of the person, (iii) the class and number of shares 
of capital stock of the Corporation which are beneficially owned by the 
person and (iv) any other information relating to the person that is required 
to be disclosed in solicitations for proxies for election of directors 
pursuant to Regulation 14A under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as 
amended;  and (b) as to the shareholder giving the notice, (i) the name and 
record address of such shareholder and (ii) the class and number of shares of 
the Corporation which are beneficially owned by such shareholder.  The 
Corporation may require any proposed nominee to furnish such other 
information as may reasonably be required by the Corporation to determine the 
eligibility of such proposed nominee to serve as 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 3


director of the Corporation.  No person shall be eligible for election as a 
director of the Corporation unless nominated in accordance with the 
procedures set forth herein.

     The Chairman of the meeting shall, if the facts warrant, determine and 
declare to the meeting that a nomination was not made in accordance with the 
foregoing procedure, and if he should so determine, he shall so declare to 
the meeting and the defective nomination shall be disregarded.

     SECTION 2.  SPECIAL MEETINGS.  Special meetings of the shareholders may 
be called by the Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the 
President, the Board of Directors or by the holders of not less than 
one-fifth of all the outstanding shares entitled to vote on the matter for 
which the meeting is called.

     SECTION 3.  PLACE OF MEETING.  The Board of Directors may designate any 
place, either within or without the State of Illinois, as the place of 
meeting for any annual meeting or for any special meeting called by the Board 
of Directors.  If no designation is made, or if a special meeting be 
otherwise called, the place of meeting shall be the principal office of the 
Corporation in the State of Illinois.

     SECTION 4.  NOTICE OF MEETINGS.  Written notice stating the place, day 
and hour of the meeting and, in the case of a special meeting, the purpose or 
purposes for which the meeting is called, shall be delivered not less than 
ten nor more than sixty days before the date of the meeting, or in the cases 
of a merger, consolidation, share exchange, dissolution or sale, lease or 
exchange of assets not less than twenty nor more than sixty days before the 
meeting, either personally or by mail, by or at the direction of the Chairman 
of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or the Secretary or 
the persons calling the meeting, to each shareholder of record entitled to 
vote at such meeting.  If mailed, such notice shall be deemed to be delivered 
when deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the shareholder at his 
or her address as it appears on the records of the Corporation, with postage 
thereon prepaid.

     SECTION 5.  FIXING RECORD DATE.  For the purpose of determining 
shareholders entitled to notice of or to vote at any meeting of shareholders, 
or shareholders entitled to receive payment of any dividend, or in order to 
make a determination of shareholders for any other proper purpose, the Board 
of Directors of the Corporation may fix in advance a date as the record date 
for any such determination of shareholders, such date in any case to be not 
more than sixty days and, for a meeting of shareholders, not less than ten 
days, or in the case of a merger, consolidation, share exchange, dissolution 
or sale, lease or exchange of assets not less than twenty days, immediately 
preceding such meeting.

     SECTION 6.  VOTING LISTS.  The Secretary shall make, or cause to have 
made, within twenty days after the record date for a meeting of shareholders 
or ten days before such meeting, whichever is earlier, a complete list of the 
shareholders entitled to vote at such meeting, arranged in alphabetical 
order, with the address of and the number of shares held by each, which list, 
for a period of ten days prior to such meeting, shall be kept on file at the 
registered office of the 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 4


Corporation and shall be subject to inspection by any shareholder and to 
copying at the shareholder's expense, at any time during usual business 
hours.  Such list shall also be produced and kept open at the time and place 
of the meeting and shall be subject to the inspection of any shareholder 
during the whole time of the meeting.  The original share ledger or transfer 
book, or a duplicate thereof kept in this State, shall be prima facie 
evidence as to who are the shareholders entitled to examine such list or 
share ledger or transfer book or to vote at any meeting of shareholders.

     SECTION 7.  QUORUM.  A majority of the outstanding shares of the 
Corporation entitled to vote on a matter, represented in person or by proxy, 
shall constitute a quorum for consideration of such matter at a meeting of 
shareholders.  If a quorum is present, the affirmative vote of the majority 
of the shares represented at the meeting and entitled to vote on a matter 
shall be the act of the shareholders, unless the vote of a greater number or 
voting by classes is required by The Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the 
Articles of Incorporation, as in effect on the date of such determination.  
If a quorum is not present, a majority of the shares of the Corporation 
entitled to vote on a matter and represented in person or by proxy at such 
meeting may adjourn the meeting from time to time without further notice.

     SECTION 8.  PROXIES.  A shareholder may appoint a proxy to vote or 
otherwise act for the shareholder by delivering a valid appointment to the 
person so appointed or such person's agent; Provided, However, no shareholder 
may name more than three persons as proxies to attend and to vote the 
shareholder's shares at any meeting of shareholders.  Without limiting the 
manner in which a shareholder may appoint such a proxy pursuant to these 
By-Laws, the following shall constitute valid means by which a shareholder 
may make such an appointment:

     (a)  A shareholder may sign a proxy appointment form.  The shareholder's
          signature may be affixed by any reasonable means, including, but not
          limited to, by facsimile signature.

     (b)  A shareholder may transmit or authorize the transmission of a
          telegram, cablegram, or other means of electronic transmission;
          provided that any such transmission must either set forth or be
          submitted with information from which it can be determined that the
          telegram, cablegram, or other electronic transmission was authorized
          by the shareholder.  If it is determined that the telegram, cablegram,
          or other electronic transmission is valid, the inspectors or, if there
          are no inspectors, such other persons making that determination shall
          specify the information upon which they relied.

No proxy shall be valid after the expiration of eleven months from the date
thereof unless otherwise provided in the proxy.  Each proxy continues in full
force and effect until revoked by the person appointing the proxy prior to the
vote pursuant thereto, except as otherwise provided by law.  Such revocation may
be effected by a writing delivered to the secretary of the Corporation stating
that the proxy is revoked or by a subsequent delivery of a valid proxy by, or 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 5


by the attendance at the meeting and voting in person by the person 
appointing the proxy.  The dates of the proxy shall presumptively determine 
the order of appointment.

     SECTION 9.  VOTING OF SHARES.  Each outstanding share, regardless of 
class, shall be entitled to one vote in each matter submitted to a vote at a 
meeting of shareholders and, in all elections for Directors, every 
shareholder shall have the right to vote the number of shares owned by such 
shareholder for as many persons as there are Directors to be elected, or to 
cumulate such votes and give one candidate as many votes as shall equal the 
number of Directors multiplied by the number of such shares or to distribute 
such cumulative votes in any proportion among any number of candidates; 
provided that, vacancies on the Board of Directors may be filled as provided 
in Section 9, Article III of these By-Laws.  A shareholder may vote either in 
person or by proxy.

     SECTION 10.  VOTING OF SHARES BY CERTAIN HOLDERS.  Shares of this 
Corporation held by the Corporation in a fiduciary capacity may be voted and 
shall be counted in determining the total number of outstanding shares 
entitled to vote at any given time.

     Shares registered in the name of another corporation, domestic or 
foreign, may be voted by any officer, agent, proxy or other legal 
representative authorized to vote such shares under the law of incorporation 
of such corporation.

     Shares registered in the name of a deceased person, a minor ward or a 
person under legal disability may be voted by his or her administrator, 
executor, or court appointed guardian, either in person or by proxy without a 
transfer of such shares into the name of such administrator, executor, or 
court appointed guardian.  Shares registered in the name of a trustee may be 
voted by him or her, either in person or by proxy.

     Shares registered in the name of a receiver may be voted by such 
receiver, and shares held by or under the control of a receiver may be voted 
by such receiver without the transfer thereof into his or her name if 
authority so to do is contained in an appropriate order of the court by which 
such receiver was appointed.

     A shareholder whose shares are pledged shall be entitled to vote such 
shares until the shares have been transferred into the name of the pledgee, 
and thereafter the pledgee shall be entitled to vote the shares so 
transferred.

     SECTION 11.  VOTING BY BALLOT.  Voting on any question or in any 
election may be viva voce unless the presiding officer shall order that 
voting be by ballot.

     SECTION 12.  INSPECTORS OF ELECTION.  The Board of Directors in advance 
of any meeting of shareholders may appoint inspectors to act at such meeting 
or any adjournment thereof.  If inspectors of election are not so appointed, 
the officer or person acting as chairman at any such meeting may, and on the 
request of any shareholder or his proxy, shall make such appointment.  In 
case any person appointed as inspector shall fail to appear or to act, the 
vacancy 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 6


may be filled by appointment made by the Board of Directors in advance of the 
meeting or at the meeting by the officer or person acting as chairman.

     Such inspectors shall ascertain and report the number of shares 
represented at the meeting, based upon their determination of the validity 
and effect of proxies; count all votes and report the results; and do such 
other acts as are proper to conduct the election and voting with impartiality 
and fairness to all the shareholders.

     Each report of an inspector shall be in writing and signed by him or her 
or by a majority of them if there be more than one inspector acting at such 
meeting.  If there is more than one inspector, the report of a majority shall 
be the report of the inspectors.  The report of the inspector or inspectors 
on the number of shares represented at the meeting and the results of the 
voting shall be prima facie evidence thereof.

                                    ARTICLE III

                                     DIRECTORS

     SECTION 1.  GENERAL POWERS.  The business and affairs of the Corporation 
shall be managed under the direction of the Board of Directors.

     SECTION 2.  NUMBER, TENURE AND QUALIFICATIONS.  The number of Directors 
of the Corporation shall be sixteen.  The terms of all Directors shall expire 
at the next annual meeting of shareholders following their election.  Despite 
the expiration of a Director's term, he or she shall continue to serve until 
the next meeting of shareholders at which Directors are elected.  Directors 
need not be residents of Illinois or shareholders of the Corporation.

     SECTION 3.  REGULAR MEETINGS.  A regular annual meeting of the Board of 
Directors shall be held without other notice than this By-Law, immediately 
after, and at the same place as, the annual meeting of shareholders.  Other 
regular meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held at the principal 
office of the Corporation on the second Friday of every month at 9:00 a.m. 
without other notice than this By-Law.  The Board of Directors may provide, 
by resolution, for the holding of the regular monthly meetings at a different 
time and place, either within or without the State of Illinois, or for the 
omission of the regular monthly meeting altogether.  Where the Board of 
Directors has, by resolution, changed or omitted regular meetings, no other 
notice than such resolution shall be given.

     SECTION 4.  SPECIAL MEETINGS.  Special meetings of the Board of 
Directors may be called by or at the request of the Chairman of the Board, 
the Chairman of the Executive Committee, the Chief Executive Officer, the 
President, or of any four Directors.  The persons authorized to call special 
meetings of the Board of Directors may fix any place, either within or 
without the State of Illinois, as the place for holding any special meeting 
of the Board of Directors.

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 7


     SECTION 5. NOTICE.  Notice of any special meeting shall be given:  (i) 
at least one day prior thereto if the notice is given personally or by an 
electronic transmission, (ii) at least two business days prior thereto if the 
notice is given by having it delivered by a third party entity that provides 
delivery services in the ordinary  course of business and guarantees delivery 
of the notice to the Director no later than the following business day, and 
(iii) at least seven days prior thereto if the notice is given by mail.  For 
this purpose, the term "electronic transmission" may include, but shall not 
be limited to, a telex, facsimile, or other electronic means.  Notice shall 
be delivered to the Director's business address and/or telephone number and 
shall be deemed given upon electronic transmission, upon delivery to the 
third party delivery service, or upon being deposited in the United States 
mail with postage thereon prepaid.  Any Director may waive notice of any 
meeting by signing a written waiver of notice either before or after the 
meeting.  Attendance of a Director at any meeting shall constitute a waiver 
of notice of such meeting, except where a Director attends a meeting for the 
express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business because the 
meeting is not lawfully called or convened.  Neither the business to be 
transacted at, nor the purpose of, any regular or special meeting of the 
Board of Directors need to be specified in the notice or waiver of notice of 
such meeting.

     SECTION 6.  QUORUM.  A majority of the number of Directors fixed by 
these By-Laws shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business at any 
meeting of the Board of Directors; provided, that if less than a majority of 
such number of Directors are present at said meeting, a majority of the 
Directors present may adjourn the meeting from time to time without further 
notice.

     SECTION 7.  MANNER OF VOTING.  The act of the majority of the Directors 
present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the 
Board of Directors.

     SECTION 8.  INFORMAL ACTION BY DIRECTORS.  Any action required to be 
taken at a meeting of the Board of Directors, or any other action which may 
be taken at a meeting of the Board of Directors or a committee thereof, may 
be taken without a meeting if a consent in writing, setting forth the action 
so taken, shall be signed by all of the Directors entitled to vote with 
respect to the subject matter thereof, or by all the members of such 
committee, as the case may be.

     The consent shall be evidenced by one or more written approvals, each of 
which sets forth the action taken and bears the signature of one or more 
Directors.  All the approvals evidencing the consent shall be delivered to 
the Secretary of the Corporation to be filed in the corporate records.  The 
action taken shall be effective when all the Directors have approved the 
consent unless the consent specifies a different effective date.

     Any such consent signed by all the Directors or all the members of a 
committee shall have the same effect as a unanimous vote.

     SECTION 9.  VACANCIES.  Any vacancy occurring in the Board of Directors and
any directorship to be filled by reason of an increase in the number of
Directors, may be filled by 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 8


election at an annual meeting or at a special meeting of shareholders called 
for that purpose.  A Director elected to fill a vacancy shall serve until the 
next annual meeting of shareholders.  A majority of Directors then in office 
may also fill one or more vacancies arising between meetings of shareholders 
by reason of an increase in the number of Directors or otherwise, and any 
Director so selected shall serve until the next annual meeting of 
shareholders, provided that at no time may the number of Directors selected 
to fill vacancies in this manner during any interim period between meetings 
of shareholders exceed 33-1/3 per cent of the total membership of the Board 
of Directors.

     SECTION 10.  PRESUMPTION OF ASSENT.  A Director of the Corporation who 
is present at a meeting of the Board of Directors or any committee thereof at 
which action on any corporate matter is taken is conclusively presumed to 
have assented to the action taken unless his or her dissent is entered in the 
minutes of the meeting or unless he or she files his or her written dissent 
to such action with the person acting as the secretary of the meeting before 
the adjournment thereof or forwards such dissent by registered or certified 
mail to the Secretary of the Corporation immediately after the adjournment of 
the meeting.  Such right to dissent shall not apply to a Director who voted 
in favor of such action.

     SECTION 11.  APPOINTMENT OF AUDITORS.  Upon the recommendation of the 
Audit Committee, the Board of Directors shall appoint annually a firm of 
independent public accountants as auditors of the Corporation.  Such 
appointment shall be submitted to the shareholders for ratification at the 
Annual Meeting next following such appointment.  Should the holders of a 
majority of the shares represented at the meeting fail to ratify the 
appointment of any firm as auditors of the Corporation, or should the Board 
of Directors for any reason determine that such appointment be terminated, 
the Board of Directors shall appoint another firm of independent public 
accountants to act as auditors of the Corporation and such appointment shall 
be submitted to the shareholders for ratification at the Annual or Special 
Shareholders Meeting next following such appointment.

                                     ARTICLE IV

                                     COMMITTEES

     SECTION 1.  APPOINTMENT.  A majority of the Board of Directors may 
create one or more committees and appoint members of the Board to serve on 
the committee or committees.  Each committee shall have three or more 
members, who serve at the pleasure of the Board.  The Board shall designate 
one member of each committee to be chairman of the committee.  The Board 
shall designate a secretary of each committee who may be, but need not be, a 
member of the committee or the Board.

     SECTION 2.  COMMITTEE MEETINGS.  A majority of any committee shall 
constitute a quorum and a majority of the committee is necessary for 
committee action.  A committee may act by unanimous consent in writing 
without a meeting. Committee meetings may be called by the Chairman of the 
Board, the chairman of the committee, or any two of the committee's

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 9


members. The time and place of committee meetings shall be designated in the 
notice of such meeting.  Notice of each committee meeting shall be given to 
each committee member.  Each Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings 
and such minutes shall be distributed to the Board of Directors.

     SECTION 3.  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.  The Board shall appoint an Executive 
Committee.  A majority of the members of the Committee shall be selected from 
those Directors who are not then serving as full-time employees of the 
Corporation or any of its subsidiaries.

     SECTION 4.  DUTIES OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.  The Executive Committee 
may, when the Board of Directors is not in session, exercise the authority of 
the Board in the management of the business and affairs of the Corporation; 
provided, however, the Committee may not:

          (1)  authorize distributions;

          (2)  approve or recommend to shareholders any act the Business
               Corporation Act of 1983 requires to be approved by shareholders.

          (3)  fill vacancies on the Board or on any of its committees;

          (4)  elect or remove Officers or fix the compensation of any member of
               the Committee;

          (5)  adopt, amend or repeal the By-Laws;

          (6)  approve a plan of merger not requiring shareholder approval;

          (7)  authorize or approve reacquisition of shares, except according to
               a general formula or method prescribed by the Board;

          (8)  authorize or approve the issuance or sale, or contract for sale,
               of shares or determine the designation and relative rights,
               preferences, and limitations of a series of shares, except that
               the Board may direct the Committee to fix the specific terms of
               the issuance or sale or contract for sale or the number of shares
               to be allocated to particular employees under an employee benefit
               plan; or

          (9)  amend, alter, repeal, or take action inconsistent with any
               resolution or action of the Board of Directors when the
               resolution or action of the Board of Directors provides by its
               terms that it shall not be amended, altered or repealed by action
               of the Committee.

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 10


     SECTION 5.  AUDIT COMMITTEE.  The Board of Directors shall appoint an 
Audit Committee.  All of the members of the Committee shall be selected from 
those Directors who are not then serving as full-time employees of the 
Corporation or any of its subsidiaries.

     SECTION 6.  DUTIES OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE.  The Audit Committee shall:

          (1)  recommend to the Board of Directors annually a firm of
               independent public accountants to act as auditors of the
               Corporation;

          (2)  review with the auditors in advance the scope of and fees for
               their annual audit;

          (3)  review with the auditors and the management, from time to time,
               the Corporation's accounting principles, policies, and practices
               and its reporting policies and practices;

          (4)  review with the auditors annually the results of their audit; and

          (5)  review from time to time with the auditors and the Corporation's
               financial personnel the adequacy of the Corporation's accounting,
               financial and operating controls.

     SECTION 7.  COMPENSATION COMMITTEE.  The Board of Directors shall 
appoint a Compensation Committee.  The members of the Committee shall be 
selected from those Directors who are not then serving as full-time employees 
of the Corporation or any of its subsidiaries and who are "non-employee 
directors" under Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934, or any similar successor rule.

     SECTION 8.  DUTIES OF THE COMPENSATION COMMITTEE.  The Compensation 
Committee shall:

          (1)  administer the stock option plans of the Corporation;

          (2)  review, at least annually, the compensation of Directors who are
               not then serving as full-time employees of the Corporation or any
               of its subsidiaries and recommend for approval by the Board any
               change in the compensation of such Directors;

          (3)  review, at least annually, the compensation of all Officers of
               the Corporation.  The committee shall have the authority to
               approve changes in the base compensation, and any proposed
               special separation arrangements of Officers, except the Chairman
               of the Board of Directors, the Chief Executive Officer, and the
               President, whose base compensation,

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 11


               and any special separation arrangements, shall be subject to
               approval by the Board of Directors.

     SECTION 9.  NOMINATIONS AND BOARD AFFAIRS COMMITTEE.  The Board of 
Directors shall appoint a Nominations and Board Affairs Committee.  A 
majority of the members of the Committee shall be selected from those 
Directors who are not then serving as full-time employees of the Corporation 
or any of its subsidiaries.

     SECTION 10.  DUTIES OF THE NOMINATIONS AND BOARD AFFAIRS COMMITTEE.  The 
Nominations and Board Affairs Committee shall:

          (1)  develop general criteria for selection of and qualifications
               desirable in members of the Board of Directors and Officers of
               the Corporation and aid the Board in identifying and attracting
               qualified candidates to stand for election to such positions;

          (2)  recommend to the Board annually a slate of nominees to be
               proposed by the Board to the shareholders as nominees for
               election as Directors, and, from time to time, recommend persons
               to fill any vacancy on the Board;

          (3)  review annually, or more often if appropriate, the performance of
               individual members of the management of the Corporation and the
               membership and performance of committees of the Board and make
               recommendations deemed necessary or appropriate to the Board;

          (4)  recommend to the Board persons to be elected as Officers of the
               Corporation; and

          (5)  serve in an advisory capacity to the Board of Directors and
               Chairman of the Board on matters of organization, management
               succession plans, major changes in the organizational structure
               of the Corporation, and the conduct of Board activities,
               including assisting in the evaluation of the Board's own
               performance.

                                     ARTICLE V

                                      OFFICERS

     SECTION 1.  NUMBER.  The Officers of the Corporation shall be the 
Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, one or 
more Executive, Group or Senior Vice Presidents, one or more Vice Presidents, 
a Treasurer, a Secretary, a Controller, a General Counsel and such Assistant 
Treasurers and Assistant Secretaries as the Board of Directors may elect.  
Any two or more offices may be held by the same person.

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 12


     SECTION 2.  ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.  The Officers of the 
Corporation shall be elected annually by the Board of Directors at the first 
meeting of the Board of Directors held after each annual meeting of 
shareholders.  If the election of Officers shall not be held at such meeting, 
such election shall be held as soon thereafter as conveniently may be.  
Vacancies or new offices may be filled at any meeting of the Board of 
Directors.  Each Officer shall hold office until his or her successor shall 
have been duly elected and shall have qualified or until his or her death or 
until he or she shall resign or shall have been removed in the manner 
hereinafter provided.

     SECTION 3.  REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.  Any Officer may be removed by the 
Board of Directors whenever in its judgment the best interests of the 
Corporation will be served thereby.

     SECTION 4.  VACANCIES.  A vacancy in any office because of death, 
resignation, removal, disqualification or otherwise, may be filled by the 
Board of Directors for the unexpired portion of the term.

     SECTION 5.  CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Directors 
and the shareholders.  The Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible for 
the overall management of the Corporation subject to the direction of the 
Board of Directors. 

     SECTION 6.  PRESIDENT.  The President shall be the Chief Operating 
Officer. The President shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the 
Board of Directors or by the Chief Executive Officer.

     SECTION 7.  EXECUTIVE, GROUP AND SENIOR VICE PRESIDENTS.  Each 
Executive, Group, or Senior Vice President shall be responsible for 
supervising and coordinating a major area of the Corporation's activities 
subject to the direction of the Chief Executive Officer or the President.

     SECTION 8.  VICE PRESIDENTS.  Each of the Vice Presidents shall be 
responsible for those activities designated by an Executive, Group, or Senior 
Vice President, the President, the Chief Executive Officer or by the Board of 
Directors.

     SECTION 9.  TREASURER.  The Treasurer shall administer the investment, 
financing,  insurance and credit activities of the Corporation.

     SECTION 10.  SECRETARY.  The Secretary will be the custodian of the 
corporate records and of the seal of the Corporation, will countersign 
certificates for shares of the Corporation, and in general will perform all 
duties incident to the office of the Secretary.  The Secretary shall have the 
authority to certify the By-Laws, resolutions of the shareholders and the 
Board of Directors and committees thereof, and other documents of the 
Corporation as true and correct copies hereof.

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 13


     SECTION 11.  CONTROLLER.  The Controller will conduct the accounting 
activities of the Corporation, including the maintenance of the Corporation's 
general and supporting ledgers and books of account, operating budgets, and 
the preparation and consolidation of financial statements.

     SECTION 12.  GENERAL COUNSEL.  The General Counsel will be the chief 
consultant of the Corporation on legal matters.  He or she will supervise all 
matters of legal import concerning the interests of the Corporation.

     SECTION 13.  ASSISTANT TREASURER.  The Assistant Treasurer shall, in the 
absence or incapacity of the Treasurer, perform the duties and exercise the 
powers of the Treasurer, and shall perform such other duties as shall from 
time to time be given to him or her by the Treasurer.

     SECTION 14.  ASSISTANT SECRETARY.  The Assistant Secretary shall, in the 
absence or incapacity of the Secretary, perform the duties and exercise the 
powers of the Secretary, and shall perform such other duties as shall from 
time to time be given to him or her by the Secretary.  The Assistant 
Secretary shall be, with the Secretary, keeper of the books, records, and the 
seal of the Corporation, and shall have the authority to certify the By-Laws, 
resolutions and other documents of the Corporation.

     SECTION 15.  GENERAL POWERS OF OFFICERS.  The Chairman of the Board, the 
Chief Executive Officer, the President, and any Executive, Group or Senior 
Vice President, may sign without countersignature any deeds, mortgages, 
bonds, contracts, reports to public agencies, or other instruments whether or 
not the Board of Directors has expressly authorized execution of such 
instruments, except in cases where the signing and execution thereof shall be 
expressly delegated by the Board of Directors or by these By-Laws solely to 
some other Officer or agent of the Corporation, or shall be required by law 
to be otherwise signed or executed.  Any other Officer of this Corporation 
may sign contracts, reports to public agencies, or other instruments which 
are in the regular course of business and within the scope of his or her 
authority, except where the signing and execution thereof shall be expressly 
delegated by the Board of Directors or by these By-Laws to some other Officer 
or agent of the Corporation, or shall be required by law to be otherwise 
signed or executed.

                                     ARTICLE VI

                     CERTIFICATES FOR SHARES AND THEIR TRANSFER

     SECTION 1.  CERTIFICATES FOR SHARES.  Certificates representing shares 
of the Corporation shall be in such form as may be determined by the Board of 
Directors.  Such certificates shall be signed by any one of the Chairman of 
the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President or an Executive Vice 
President, and shall be countersigned by the Secretary or an Assistant 
Secretary and shall be sealed with the seal, or a facsimile of the seal, of 
the Corporation.  If a certificate is countersigned by a Transfer Agent or 
Registrar, other than the 

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 14


Corporation itself or its employee, any other signatures or countersignature 
on the certificate may be facsimiles.  In case any Officer of the 
Corporation, or any officer or employee of the Transfer Agent or Registrar 
who has signed or whose facsimile signature has been placed upon such 
certificate ceases to be an Officer of the Corporation, or an officer or 
employee of the Transfer Agent or Registrar before such certificate is 
issued, the certificate may be issued by the Corporation with the same effect 
as if the Officer of the Corporation, or the officer or employee of the 
Transfer Agent or Registrar had not ceased to be such at the date of its 
issue.  Each certificate representing shares shall state: that the 
Corporation is organized under the laws of the State of Illinois; the name of 
the person to whom issued; the number and class of shares; and the 
designation of the series, if any, which such certificate represents.  Each 
certificate shall be consecutively numbered or otherwise identified.  The 
name of the person to whom the shares represented thereby are issued, with 
the number of shares and date of issue, shall be entered on the books of the 
Corporation.  All certificates surrendered to the Corporation for transfer 
shall be canceled, and no new certificate shall be issued in replacement 
until the former certificate for a like number of shares shall have been 
surrendered and canceled, except in the case of lost, destroyed or mutilated 
certificates.

     SECTION 2.  TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR.  The Board of Directors may 
from time to time appoint such Transfer Agents and Registrars in such 
locations as it shall determine, and may, in its discretion, appoint a single 
entity to act in the capacity of both Transfer Agent and Registrar in any one 
location.

     SECTION 3.  TRANSFER OF SHARES.  Transfers of shares of the Corporation 
shall be made only on the books of the Corporation at the request of the 
holder of record thereof or of his attorney, lawfully constituted in writing, 
and on surrender for cancellation of the certificate for such shares.  The 
person in whose name shares stand on the books of the Corporation shall be 
deemed the owner thereof for all purposes as regards the Corporation.

     SECTION 4.  LOST, DESTROYED OR MUTILATED CERTIFICATES.  In case of lost, 
destroyed or mutilated certificates, duplicate certificates shall be issued 
to the person claiming the loss, destruction or mutilation, provided:

     (a)  That the claimant furnishes an affidavit stating the facts of such
          loss, destruction or mutilation so far as known to him or her and
          further stating that the affidavit is made to induce the Corporation
          to issue a duplicate certificate or certificates; and that issuance of
          the duplicate certificate or certificates is approved:

          (i)   in a case involving a certificate or certificates for more than
                1,000 shares, by the Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive
                Officer, the President, an Executive Vice President, or the
                Secretary; or

          (ii)  in a case involving a certificate or certificates for 1,000
                shares or less, by the Transfer Agent appointed by the Board of
                Directors for the transfer of the shares represented by such
                certificate or certificates;

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 15


          upon receipt of a bond, with one or more sureties, in the amount to be
          determined by the party giving such approval; or 

     (b)  that issuance of the said duplicate certificate or certificates is
          approved by the Board of Directors upon such terms and conditions as
          it shall determine.

                                    ARTICLE VII
                                          
                                    FISCAL YEAR
                                          
     The fiscal year of the Corporation shall begin on the first day of January
in each year and end on the last day of December in each year.

                                    ARTICLE VIII
                                          
                  VOTING SHARES OR INTERESTS IN OTHER CORPORATIONS
                                          
     The Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, 
an Executive, Group, or Senior Vice President and each of them, shall have 
the authority to act for the Corporation by voting any shares or exercising 
any other interest owned by the Corporation in any other corporation or other 
business association, including wholly or partially owned subsidiaries of the 
Corporation, such authority to include, but not be limited to, power to 
attend any meeting of any such corporation or other business association, to 
vote shares in the election of directors and upon any other matter coming 
before any such meeting, to waive notice of any such meeting and to consent 
to the holding thereof without notice, and to appoint a proxy or proxies to 
represent the Corporation at any such meeting with all the powers that the 
said Officer would have under this section if personally present.

                                     ARTICLE IX
                                          
                           DISTRIBUTIONS TO SHAREHOLDERS
                                          
     The Board of Directors may authorize, and the Corporation may make,
distributions to its shareholders, subject to any restriction in the Articles of
Incorporation and subject also to the limitations prescribed by law.

                                     ARTICLE X
                                          
                                        SEAL
                                          
     The Corporate Seal of the Corporation shall be in the form of a circle 
in the center of which is the insignia "[Logo]" and shall have inscribed 
thereon the name of the Corporation and the words "an Illinois Corporation."

<PAGE>

BY-LAWS
                                                           Page 16


                                     ARTICLE XI
                                          
                                  WAIVER OF NOTICE
                                          
     Whenever any notice whatever is required to be given under the 
provisions of these By-Laws or under the provisions of the Articles of 
Incorporation or under the provisions of The Business Corporation Act of 
1983, a waiver thereof in writing, signed by the person or persons entitled 
to such notice, whether before or after the time stated therein, shall be 
deemed equivalent to the giving of such notice.  Attendance at any meeting 
shall constitute waiver of notice thereof unless the person at the meeting 
objects to the holding of the meeting because proper notice was not given.

                                    ARTICLE XII
                                          
                                     AMENDMENTS
                                          
     These By-Laws may be made, altered, amended or repealed by the 
shareholders or the Board of Directors.
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-10.8
<SEQUENCE>3
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 10.8
<TEXT>

<PAGE>

                                                Amended effective April 23, 1999

             ABBOTT LABORATORIES NON-EMPLOYEE DIRECTORS' FEE PLAN

                                  SECTION 1
                                   PURPOSE

     ABBOTT LABORATORIES NON-EMPLOYEE DIRECTORS' FEE PLAN - referred to below 
as the "Plan" - has been established by ABBOTT LABORATORIES - referred to below 
as the "Company" - to attract and retain as members of its Board of Directors 
persons who are not full-time employees of the Company or any of its 
subsidiaries but whose business experience and judgment are a valuable asset to 
the Company and its subsidiaries.

                                  SECTION 2
                              DIRECTORS COVERED

     As used in the Plan, the term "Director" means any person who is elected 
to the Board of Directors of the Company in April, 1962 or at any time 
thereafter, and is not a full-time employee of the Company or any of its 
subsidiaries.

                                  SECTION 3
                          FEES PAYABLE TO DIRECTORS

     3.1  Each Director shall be entitled to a deferred monthly fee of Five 
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for each calendar month or portion thereof 
(excluding the month in which he is first elected a Director) that he holds 
such office with the Company.

     3.2  A Director who serves as Chairman of the Executive Committee of the 
Board of Directors shall be entitled to a deferred monthly fee of One Thousand 
Six Hundred Dollars ($1,600.00) for each calendar month or portion thereof 
(excluding the month in which he is first elected to such position) that he 
holds such position.

     3.3  A Director who serves as Chairman of the Audit Committee of the Board 
of Directors shall be entitled to a deferred monthly fee of Six Hundred 
Sixty-Seven Dollars ($667.00) for each calendar month or portion thereof 
(excluding the month in which he is first elected to such position) that he 
holds such position.

     3.4  A Director who serves as Chairman of the Compensation Committee of 
the Board of Directors shall be entitled to a deferred monthly fee of Six 
Hundred Sixty-Seven Dollars ($667.00) for each calendar month or portion 
thereof (excluding the month in which he is first elected to such position) 
that he holds such position.

     3.5  A Director who serves as Chairman of the Nominations Committee of the 
Board of Directors shall be entitled to a deferred monthly fee of Six Hundred 
Sixty-Seven Dollars ($667.00) for each calendar month or portion thereof 
(excluding the month in which he is first elected to such position) that he 
holds such position.

<PAGE>

                                      -2-


     3.6  A Director who serves as Chairman of any other Committee created by 
this Board of Directors shall be entitled to a deferred monthly fee of Six 
Hundred Sixty-Seven Dollars ($667.00) for each calendar month or portion 
thereof (excluding the month in which he is first elected to such position) 
that he holds such position.

     3.7  A Director's Deferred Fee Account shall be credited with interest 
annually.  During the calendar years 1968 and prior, the rate of interest 
credited to deferred fees shall be four (4) percent per annum.  During the 
calendar years 1969 through 1992, the rate of interest credited to deferred 
fees shall be the average of the prime rates being charged by two largest 
commercial banks in the City of Chicago as of the end of the month coincident 
with or last preceding the date upon which said interest is so credited.  
During the calendar years 1993 and subsequent, the rate of interest credited to 
deferred fees shall be equal to:  (a) the average of the prime rates being 
charged by the two largest commercial banks in the City of Chicago as of the 
end of the month coincident with or last preceding the date upon which said 
interest is so credited;  plus (b) two hundred twenty-five (225) basis points.  
For purposes of the provisions of the Plan, the term "deferred fees" shall 
include "deferred monthly fees," and "deferred meeting fees," and shall also 
include any such interest credited thereon.

                                  SECTION 4
                          PAYMENT OF DIRECTORS' FEES

     4.1  A Director's deferred fees earned pursuant to the Plan shall commence 
to be paid on the first day of the calendar month next following the earlier of 
his death or his attainment of age sixty-five (65) if he is not then serving as 
a Director, or the termination of his service as a Director if he serves as a 
Director after the attainment of age sixty-five (65); provided that any 
Director may, by written notice filed with the Secretary of the Company, elect 
to receive current payment of all or any portion of the monthly and meeting 
fees earned by him in calendar years subsequent to the calendar year in which 
he files such notice (or all or any portion of such fees earned by him in the 
calendar year he first becomes a Director, if such notice is filed within 30 
days of becoming a Director), in which case such fees or the portion thereof so 
designated earned in such calendar years shall not be deferred but shall be 
paid quarterly as earned and no interest shall be credited thereon.  Such 
election may be revoked or modified by any Director by written notice to the 
Secretary of the Company as to fees to be earned by him in calendar years 
subsequent to the calendar year in which he files such notice.

     4.2  After a Director's deferred fees shall have commenced to be payable 
pursuant to Paragraph 4.1 they shall be payable in annual installments in the 
order in which they shall have been deferred (i.e. the deferred fees for the 
earliest year of service as a Director will be paid on the date provided for in 
Section 4.1, the deferred fees for the next earliest year of service as a 
Director will be paid on the anniversary of the payment of the first 
installment, etc.).

     4.3  A Director's deferred fees shall continue to be paid until all 
deferred fees which he is entitled to receive under the Plan shall have been 
paid to him (or, in case of his death, to his beneficiary).

<PAGE>

                                      -3-


     4.4  Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Plan, if a Director's 
service as a Director should terminate for any reason within five (5) years 
after the date of a Change in Control, the aggregate unpaid balance of such 
Director's deferred fees plus all unpaid interest credited thereon, shall be 
paid to such Director in a lump sum within thirty (30) days following the date 
of such termination.

     4.5  A "Change in Control" shall be deemed to have occurred on the 
earliest of the following dates:

     (i)  The date any entity or person (including a "group" as defined in
          Section 13(d)(3) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange
          Act")) shall have become the beneficial owner of, or shall have
          obtained voting control over thirty percent (30%) or more of the
          outstanding common shares of the Company;

     (ii) The date the shareholders of the Company approve a definitive
          agreement (A) to merge or consolidate the Company with or into another
          corporation, in which the Company is not the continuing or surviving
          corporation or pursuant to which any common shares of the company
          would be converted into cash, securities or other property of another
          corporation, other than a merger of the Company in which holders of
          common shares immediately prior to the merger have the same
          proportionate ownership of common stock of the surviving corporation
          immediately after the merger as immediately before, or (B) to sell or
          otherwise dispose of substantially all the assets of the Company; or

    (iii) The date there shall have been a change in a majority of the Board of
          Directors of the Company within a twelve (12) month period unless the
          nomination for election by the Company's shareholders of each new
          director was approved by the vote of two-thirds of the directors then
          still in office who were in office at the beginning of the twelve (12)
          month period.

     4.6  The provisions of Paragraphs 4.4 and 4.5 and this Paragraph 4.6 may 
not be amended or deleted, nor superseded by any other provision of the Plan, 
during the period beginning on the date of a Change in Control and ending on 
the date five (5) years following such Change in Control.

                                  SECTION 5
                        DIRECTORS' RETIREMENT BENEFIT

     5.1  Effective April 30, 1998, each of the persons serving as a Director 
on December 12, 1997 shall be credited with a retirement benefit of $4,167 a 
month for 120 months of continuous service and no additional retirement 
benefits shall accrue under the Plan.  Each of the persons serving as a 
Director on December 12, 1997 may elect: (a) to have his or her retirement 
benefit under the Plan treated as provided in Section 5.2 of the Plan; or (b) 
to have the present value of that retirement benefit credited to an unfunded 
phantom stock account and converted into phantom stock units based on the 
closing price of the Company's common stock on April 30, 1998, with those 
phantom stock units then being credited with the same cash and stock dividends, 
stock splits and other distributions and adjustments as are paid on the 
Company's common stock.  The phantom stock units shall be payable to the 
Director in annual payments commencing on the first day of the calendar month 
next following the earlier of the Director's death or termination of service as 
a Director, in an amount determined by the closing price of the

<PAGE>

                                      -4-


Company's common stock on the first business day preceding the payment date.  
Unless the retirement benefit is terminated, the annual benefit shall continue 
to be paid on the anniversary of the day on which the first such retirement 
benefit payment was made, until the benefit has been paid for ten years, or 
until the death of the Director or surviving spouse, if earlier.  If a Director 
should die with such benefit still in effect, prior to receipt of all payments 
due hereunder, the annual benefit shall continue to be paid to the surviving 
spouse of such Director until all payments due hereunder have been made or 
until the death of the surviving spouse, if earlier.

     5.2  Any person serving as a Director on December 12, 1997 who elects to 
have his or her retirement benefit paid pursuant to this Section 5.2 shall 
receive a monthly benefit equal to $4,167.  Payment of the monthly benefit 
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month next following the 
earlier of the Director's death or termination of service as a Director.  
Unless the retirement benefit is terminated, the monthly benefit shall continue 
to be paid on the first day of each calendar month thereafter, until the 
benefit has been paid for one hundred and twenty (120) months, or until the 
death of the Director or surviving spouse, if earlier.  If a Director should 
die with such benefit still in effect, prior to receipt of all payments due 
hereunder, the monthly benefit shall continue to the surviving spouse of such 
Director until all payments due hereunder have been made or until the death of 
the surviving spouse, if earlier.

     5.3  Directors who retired on or before December 12, 1997 will receive the 
form and amount of retirement benefit payable under the terms of the Plan in 
effect at the time of their retirement.

     5.4  Each Director who is granted a retirement benefit hereunder shall 
make him or herself available for such consultation with the Board of Directors 
or any committee or member thereof, as may be reasonably requested from time to 
time by the Chairman of the Board of Directors, following such Director's 
termination of service as a Director.  The Company shall reimburse each such 
Director for all reasonable travel, lodging and subsistence expenses incurred 
by the Director at the request of the Company in rendering such consultation.  
The Company may terminate the retirement benefit if the Director should fail to 
render such consultation, unless prevented by disability or other reason beyond 
the Director's control.

     5.5  It is recognized that during a Director's period of service as a 
Director and as a consultant hereunder, a Director will acquire knowledge of 
the affairs of the Company and its subsidiaries, the disclosure of which would 
be contrary to the best interests of the Company.  Accordingly, the Company may 
terminate the retirement benefit if, without the express consent of the 
Company, the Director accepts election to the Board of Directors of, acquires a 
partnership or proprietary interest in, or renders services as an employee or 
consultant to, any business entity which is engaged in substantial competition 
with the Company or any of its subsidiaries.

     5.6  An individual will be considered a Director's "surviving spouse" for 
purposes of this Section 5 only if the Director and such individual were 
married in a religious or civil ceremony recognized under the laws of the state 
where the marriage was contracted and the marriage

<PAGE>

                                      -5-


remained legally effective at the date of the Director's death.

                                    SECTION 6
                         CONVERSION TO COMMON STOCK UNITS

     6.1  Any Director who is then serving as a director may, by written notice 
filed with the Secretary of the Company, elect to have all or any portion of 
deferred fees previously earned but not yet paid, transferred from the 
Director's Deferred Fee Account to a Stock Account maintained on his or her 
behalf pursuant to paragraph 9.3.  Any election as to a portion of such fees 
shall be expressed as a percentage and the same percentage shall be applied to 
all such fees regardless of the calendar year in which earned or to all 
deferred fees earned in designated calendar years, as specified by the 
Director.  A Director may make no more than one election under this paragraph 
6.l in any calendar year.  All such elections may apply only to deferred fees 
for which an election has not previously been made and shall be irrevocable.

     6.2  Any Director may, by written notice filed with the Secretary of the 
Company, elect to have all or any portion of deferred fees earned subsequent to 
the date such notice is filed credited to a Stock Account established under 
this Section 6. Fees covered by such election shall be credited to such account 
at the end of each calendar quarter in, or for which, such fees are earned.  
Such election may be revoked or modified by such Director, by written notice 
filed with the Secretary of the Company, as to deferred fees to be earned in 
calendar years subsequent to the calendar year such notice is filed, but shall 
be irrevocable as to deferred fees earned prior to such year.

     6.3  Deferred fees credited to a Stock Account under paragraph 6.1 shall 
be converted to Common Stock Units by dividing the deferred fees so credited by 
the closing price of common shares of the Company on the date notice of 
election under paragraph 6.1 is received by the Company (or the next business 
day, if there are no sales on such date) as reported on the New York Stock 
Exchange Composite Reporting System.  Deferred fees credited to a Stock Account 
under paragraph 6.2 shall be converted to Common Stock Units by dividing the 
deferred fees so credited by the closing price of common shares of the Company 
as of the last business day of the calendar quarter for which the credit is 
made, as reported on the New York Stock Exchange Composite Reporting System. 

     6.4  Each Common Stock Unit shall be credited with the same cash and stock 
dividends, stock splits and other distributions and adjustments as are received 
by one common share of the Company.  All cash dividends and other cash 
distributions credited to Common Stock Units shall be converted to additional 
Common Stock Units by dividing each such dividend or distribution by the 
closing price of common shares of the Company on the payment date for such 
dividend or distribution, as reported by the New York Stock Exchange Composite 
Reporting System.

     6.5  The value of the Common Stock Units credited each Director shall be 
paid the Director in cash on the dates specified in paragraph 4.2 (or, if 
applicable, paragraph 4.4).  The amount of each payment shall be determined by 
multiplying the Common Stock Units payable on each date specified in paragraph 
4.2 (or, if applicable, paragraph 4.4) by the closing price of common shares of 
the Company on the day prior to that date (or the next preceding business day 
if there are no sales on such date), as reported by the New York Stock Exchange 
Composite Reporting System.

<PAGE>

                                      -6-


                                    SECTION 7
                                  MISCELLANEOUS

     7.1  Each Director or former Director entitled to payment of deferred fees 
hereunder, from time to time may name any person or persons (who may be named 
contingently or successively) to whom any deferred Director's fees earned by 
him and payable to him are to be paid in case of his death before he receives 
any or all of such deferred Director's fees.  Each designation will revoke all 
prior designations by the same Director or former Director, shall be in form 
prescribed by the Company, and will be effective only when filed by the 
Director or former Director in writing with the Secretary of the Company during 
his lifetime.  If a deceased Director or former Director shall have failed to 
name a beneficiary in the manner provided above, or if the beneficiary named by 
a deceased Director or former Director dies before him or before payment of all 
the Director's or former Director's deferred Directors' fees, the Company, in 
its discretion, may direct payment in a single sum of any remaining deferred 
Directors' fees to either:

          (a)  any one or more or all of the next of kin (including the
               surviving spouse) of the Director or former Director, and in such
               proportions as the Company determines; or

          (b)  the legal representative or representatives of the estate of the
               last to die of the Director or former Director and his last
               surviving beneficiary.

The person or persons to whom any deceased Director's or former Director's 
deferred Directors' fees are payable under this paragraph will be referred to 
as his "beneficiary."

     7.2  Establishment of the Plan and coverage thereunder of any person shall 
not be construed to confer any right on the part of such person to be nominated 
for reelection to the Board of Directors of the Company, or to be reelected to 
the Board of Directors.

     7.3  Payment of deferred Directors' fees will be made only to the person 
entitled thereto in accordance with the terms of the Plan, and deferred 
Directors' fees are not in any way subject to the debts or other obligations of 
persons entitled thereto, and may not be voluntarily or involuntarily sold, 
transferred or assigned.  When a person entitled to a payment under the Plan is 
under legal disability or, in the Company's opinion, is in any way 
incapacitated so as to be unable to manage his financial affairs, the Company 
may direct that payment be made to such person's legal representative, or to a 
relative or friend of such person for his benefit.  Any payment made in 
accordance with the preceding sentence shall be in complete discharge of the 
Company's obligation to make such payment under the Plan.

     7.4  Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Company under the 
terms of the Plan shall be by affirmative vote of a majority of the members of 
the Board of Directors then in office.

<PAGE>

                                      -7-


                                   SECTION 8
                          AMENDMENT AND DISCONTINUANCE

     While the Company expects to continue the Plan, it must necessarily 
reserve, and does hereby reserve, the right to amend or discontinue the Plan at 
any time; provided, however, that any amendment or discontinuance of the Plan 
shall be prospective in operation only, and shall not affect the payment of any 
deferred Directors' fees theretofore earned by any Director, or the conditions 
under which any such fees are to be paid or forfeited under the Plan, unless 
the Director affected shall expressly consent thereto.

                                    SECTION 9
                         ALTERNATE PAYMENT OF DEFERRED FEES

     9.1  By written notice filed with the Secretary of the Company prior to 
calendar years beginning after December 31, 1988 (or, for the calendar year he 
first becomes a Director within 30 days of becoming a Director), a Director may 
elect to receive all or any portion of his deferred fees earned in such 
calendar years in a lump sum in accordance with the provisions of this Section 
9.  An election under this subsection 9.1 may be revoked or modified by the 
Director by written notice to the Secretary of the Company as to deferred fees 
earned under Section 3 in calendar years beginning after the calendar year in 
which he files such notice. Any amounts that were deferred for calendar years 
beginning before January 1, 1989 shall automatically be paid as provided in 
this Section 9.

     9.2  If payment of a Director's deferred fees is made pursuant to 
paragraph 9.1, a portion of such fees shall be paid in cash for the Director 
directly to a "Grantor Trust" established by the Director, provided such trust 
is in a form which the Company determines to be substantially similar to the 
trust attached to this plan as Exhibit A; and the balance of the deferred fees 
shall be paid in cash directly to the Director, provided that the payment made 
directly to the Director shall approximate the aggregate federal, state and 
local individual income taxes attributable to the deferred fees paid pursuant 
to this paragraph 9.2.

     9.3  The Company will establish and maintain four separate accounts in the 
name of each Director, "a Deferred Fee Account", a "Deferred Fee Trust 
Account", a "Stock Account" and a "Stock Trust Account".  The Deferred Fee 
Account shall reflect the deferred fees and interest to be credited to a 
Director pursuant to Section 3.  The Deferred Fee Trust Account shall reflect 
any deferred fees paid in cash to a Director (including amounts paid to a 
Director's Grantor Trust and allocated to the deferred account maintained 
thereunder) pursuant to paragraph 9.2 and any adjustments made pursuant to 
paragraph 9.4.  The Stock Account shall reflect the deferred fees converted to 
Common Stock Units pursuant to Section 6 and any adjustments made pursuant to 
that Section.  The Stock Trust Account shall reflect deferred fees that have 
been converted to Common Stock Units under Section 6 and paid in cash to a 
Director (including amounts paid to a Director's Grantor Trust and allocated to 
the stock account maintained thereunder) pursuant to paragraph 9.2 and any 
adjustments made pursuant to paragraph 9.5.  The Accounts established pursuant 
to this paragraph 9.3 are for the convenience of the administration of the plan 
and no trust relationship with respect to such Accounts is intended or should 
be implied.

<PAGE>

                                      -8-


     9.4  As of the end of each calendar year, the Company shall adjust each 
Director's Deferred Fee Trust Account as follows:

          (a)  FIRST, charge an amount equal to the product of: (i)  any
               payments made to the Director during that year from the deferred
               account maintained under his or her Grantor Trust (other than
               distributions of trust earnings in excess of the Net Interest
               Accrual authorized by the administrator of the trust to provide
               for the Tax Gross Up under paragraph 9.9 below); multiplied by
               (ii) a fraction, the numerator of which is the balance in the
               Director's Deferred Fee Trust Account as of the end of the prior
               calendar year and the denominator of which is the balance in the
               deferred account maintained under the Director's Grantor Trust
               (as determined by the administrator of the trust) as of that same
               date;

          (b)  NEXT, credit an amount equal to the deferred fees that have not
               been converted to Common Stock Units that are paid that year to
               the Director (including the amount paid to the Director's Grantor
               Trust and allocated to the deferred account maintained
               thereunder) pursuant to paragraph 9.2; and

          (c)  FINALLY, credit an amount equal to the Interest Accrual earned
               for that year pursuant to paragraph 9.6.

     9.5  As of the end of each calendar year, the Company shall adjust each 
Director's Stock Trust Account as follows:

          (a)  FIRST, charge an amount equal to the product of: (i) any payments
               made to the Director during that year from the stock account
               maintained under his or her Grantor Trust (other than
               distributions of trust earnings authorized by the administrator
               of the trust to provide for the Tax Gross Up under paragraph 9.9
               below); multiplied by (ii) a fraction, the numerator of which is
               the balance in the Director's Stock Trust Account as of the end
               of the prior calendar year and the denominator of which is the
               balance in the stock account maintained under the Director's
               Grantor Trust (as determined by the administrator of the trust)
               as of that same date;

          (b)  NEXT, credit an amount equal to the deferred fees that have been
               converted to Common Stock Units that are paid that year to the
               Director (including the amount paid to the Director's Grantor
               Trust and allocated to the stock account maintained thereunder)
               pursuant to paragraph 9.2; and

          (c)  FINALLY, credit an amount equal to the Book Value Adjustments to
               be made for that year pursuant to paragraph 9.6.

     9.6  As of the end of each calendar year, a Director's Deferred Fee Trust 
Account shall be credited with interest at the rate described in paragraph 3.7. 
Any amount so credited shall be referred to as a Director's "Interest Accrual". 
As of that same date, a Director's Stock Trust Account shall be adjusted as 
provided in paragraph 6.4, and shall also be adjusted to reflect the

<PAGE>

                                      -9-


increase or decrease in the fair market value of the Company's common stock 
determined in accordance with paragraph 6.5.  Such adjustments shall be 
referred to as "Book Value Adjustments."

     9.7  In addition to any fees earned by a Director under Section 3 of this 
plan or paid under paragraphs 4.1 or 9.1 the Company shall also make a payment 
to a Director's Grantor Trust (a "Guaranteed Rate Payment"), to be credited to 
the deferred account maintained thereunder, for any year in which the net 
income credited to the deferred account maintained under such trust does not 
equal or exceed the Director's Net Interest Accrual for that year.  A 
Director's "Net Interest Accrual" for a year is an amount equal to: (a) the 
Interest Accrual credited to the Director's Deferred Fee Trust Account for that 
year; less (b) the product of (i) the amount of such Interest Accrual, 
multiplied by (ii) the aggregate of the federal, state and local individual 
income tax rates (determined in accordance with paragraph 9.10).  The 
Guaranteed Rate Payment shall equal the difference between the Director's Net 
Interest Accrual and the net income credited to the deferred account maintained 
under the Director's Grantor Trust for the year, and shall be paid within 90 
days of the end of that year.

     9.8  The Company shall also make a payment to a Director's Grantor Trust 
(a "Guaranteed Principal Payment"), to be credited to the stock account 
maintained thereunder, to the extent that the balance in the stock account 
as of the end of any calendar year is less than 75 percent of the balance of 
the Director's Stock Trust Account (net of federal, state and local income 
taxes) as of that same date.  For the calendar year in which the last 
installment distribution is made from the Director's Grantor Trust, the payment 
made under this paragraph 9.8 shall equal the amount, if any, needed to 
increase the fair market value of the stock account maintained under the 
Director's Grantor Trust; such that if a distribution of the stock account were 
then made to the Director, the Director would receive the same amount he or she 
would have received (net of federal, state and local income taxes) if his or 
her Stock Trust Account were to be distributed on that same date with the 
deferred fees that had been allocated to that Account taxed at the federal, 
state and local income tax rates in effect on the date the fees were credited 
to the Account and the balance of the Account taxed at the federal, state and 
local income tax rates in effect on the date of the distribution.  Payments 
required under this paragraph 9.8 shall be made within 90 days of the end of 
the calendar year, except the last payment which shall be made not later than 
the due date of the last installment distribution from the Director's Grantor 
Trust.

     9.9  In addition to the fees provided under Section 3, each Director (or, 
if the Director is deceased, the beneficiary designated under the Director's 
Grantor Trust) shall be entitled to a Tax Gross Up payment for each year there 
is a balance in his or her Deferred Fee Trust Account or Stock Trust Account. 
The "Tax Gross Up" shall approximate: (a) the amount necessary to compensate 
the Director (or beneficiary) for the net increase in his or her federal, state 
and local income taxes as a result of the inclusion in the Director's (or 
beneficiary's) taxable income of the income of his or her Grantor Trust and any 
Guaranteed Rate and Guaranteed Principal Payments for that year; less (b) any 
distribution to the Director (or beneficiary) of his or her Grantor Trust's net 
earnings for that year; plus (c) an amount necessary to compensate the Director 
(or beneficiary) for the net increase in the taxes described in (a) above as a 
result of the inclusion in his or her taxable income of any payment made 
pursuant to this paragraph 9.9.

<PAGE>

                                     -10-


     9.10 For purposes of this Section, a Director's federal income tax rate 
shall be deemed to be the highest marginal rate of federal individual income 
tax in effect in the calendar year in which a calculation under this Section is 
to be made and state and local tax rates shall be deemed to be the highest 
marginal rates of individual income tax in effect in the state and locality of 
the Director's residence on the date such a calculation is made, net of any 
federal tax benefits. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if a Director is 
not a citizen or resident of the United States, his or her income tax rates 
shall be deemed to be the highest marginal income tax rates actually imposed on 
the Director's benefits under this Plan or earnings under his or her Grantor 
Trust.

<PAGE>

Exhibit A


                       IRREVOCABLE GRANTOR TRUST AGREEMENT


     THIS AGREEMENT, made this ______ day of ________, 198_, by and between 
_____________ of ______, ______ (the "grantor"), and The Northern Trust Company,
located at Chicago, Illinois, as trustee (the "trustee"),

                                 WITNESSETH THAT:

     WHEREAS, the grantor desires to establish and maintain a trust to hold
certain benefits received by the grantor under the Abbott Laboratories
Non-Employee Directors' Fee Plan, as it may be amended from time to time;

     NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED as follows:

                                   ARTICLE I
                                  INTRODUCTION

     I-1.  NAME.  This agreement and the trust hereby evidenced (the "trust") 
may be referred to as the "________ 1988 Grantor Trust".

     I-2.  THE TRUST FUND.  The "trust fund" as at any date means all property 
then held by the trustee under this agreement.

     I-3.  STATUS OF THE TRUST.  The trust shall be irrevocable.  The trust is 
intended to constitute a grantor trust under Sections 671-678 of the Internal 
Revenue Code, as amended, and shall be construed accordingly.

     I-4.  THE ADMINISTRATOR.  Abbott Laboratories ("Abbott") shall act as the 
"administrator" of the trust, and as such shall have certain powers, rights and 
duties under this agreement as described below.  Abbott will certify to the 
trustee from time to time the person or persons authorized to act on behalf of 
Abbott as the administrator.  The trustee may rely on the latest certificate 
received without further inquiry or verification.

     I-5.  ACCEPTANCE.  The trustee accepts the duties and obligations of the 
"trustee" hereunder, agrees to accept funds delivered to it by the grantor or 
the administrator, and agrees to hold such funds (and any proceeds from the 
investment of such funds) in trust in accordance with this agreement.

<PAGE>

                                   ARTICLE II
                         DISTRIBUTION OF THE TRUST FUND

     II-1.  SEPARATE ACCOUNTS.  The administrator shall maintain two separate 
accounts under the trust, a "deferred account" and a "stock account." Funds 
delivered to the trustee shall be allocated between the accounts by the trustee 
as directed by the administrator.  As of the end of each calendar year, the 
administrator shall charge each account with all distributions made from such 
account during that year; and credit each account with its share of income and 
realized gains and charge each account with its share of expenses and realized 
losses for the year.  The trustee shall be required to make separate 
investments of the trust fund for the accounts, and may not administer and 
invest all funds delivered to it under the trust as one trust fund.

     II-2.  DISTRIBUTIONS PRIOR TO THE GRANTOR'S DEATH. Principal and 
accumulated income shall not be distributed from the trust prior to the 
grantor's termination of service as a Director of Abbott (the grantor's 
"settlement date"); provided that, each year the administrator may direct the 
trustee to distribute to the grantor a portion of the income of the trust fund 
for that year, with the balance of such income to be accumulated in the trust. 
The administrator shall inform the trustee of the grantor's settlement date. 
Thereafter, the trustee shall distribute the trust fund to the grantor, if then 
living, in a series of annual installments, commencing on the first day of the 
month next following the later of the grantor's settlement date or the date the 
grantor attains age 65 years.  The administrator shall inform the trustee of 
the number of installment distributions and the amount of each installment 
distribution under this paragraph II-2, and the trustee shall be fully 
protected in relying on such information received from the administrator.

     II-3.  DISTRIBUTIONS AFTER THE GRANTOR'S DEATH.  The grantor, from time to 
time may name any person or persons (who may be named contingently or 
successively and who may be natural persons or fiduciaries) to whom the 
principal of the trust fund and all accrued or undistributed income thereof 
shall be distributed in a lump sum or, if the beneficiary is the grantor's 
spouse, in installments, as directed by the grantor, upon the grantor's death. 
If the grantor directs an installment method of distribution, any amounts 
remaining at the death of the spouse beneficiary shall be distributed in a lump 
sum.  Each designation shall revoke all prior designations, shall be in writing 
and shall be effective only when filed by the grantor with the  administrator 
during the grantor's lifetime.  If the grantor fails to direct a method of 
distribution, the distribution shall be made in a lump sum.  If the grantor 
fails to designate a beneficiary as provided above, then on the grantor's 
death, the trustee shall distribute the balance of the trust fund in a lump sum 
to the executor or administrator of the grantor's estate.

     II-4.  FACILITY OF PAYMENT.  When a person entitled to a distribution 
hereunder is under legal disability, or, in the trustee's opinion, is in any 
way incapacitated so as to be unable to manage his or her financial affairs, 
the trustee may make such distribution to such person's legal representative, 
or to a relative or friend of such person for such person's benefit.  Any 
distribution made in accordance with the preceding sentence shall be a full and 
complete discharge of any liability for such distribution hereunder.

<PAGE>

     II-5.  PERPETUITIES.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this 
agreement, on the day next preceding the end of 21 years after the death of the 
last to die of the grantor and the grantor's descendants living on the date of 
this instrument, the trustee shall immediately distribute any remaining balance 
in the trust to the beneficiaries then entitled to distributions hereunder.

<PAGE>

                                  ARTICLE III
                          MANAGEMENT OF THE TRUST FUND

     III-1.  GENERAL POWERS.  The trustee shall, with respect to the trust 
fund, have the following powers, rights and duties in addition to those 
provided elsewhere in this agreement or by law:

          (a)  Subject to the limitations of subparagraph (b) next below, to
               sell, contract to sell, purchase, grant or exercise options to
               purchase, and otherwise deal with all assets of the trust fund,
               in such way, for such considerations, and on such terms and
               conditions as the trustee decides.

          (b)  To retain in cash such amounts as the trustee considers
               advisable; and to invest and reinvest the balance of the trust
               fund, without distinction between principal and income, in common
               stock of Abbott Laboratories, or in obligations of the United
               States Government and its agencies or which are backed by the
               full faith and credit of the United States Government or in any
               mutual fund, common trust fund or collective investment fund
               which invests solely in such obligations; and any such investment
               made or retained by the trustee in good faith shall be proper
               despite any resulting risk or lack of diversification or
               marketability.

          (c)  To deposit cash in any depositary (including the banking
               department of the bank acting as trustee) without liability for
               interest, and to invest cash in savings accounts or time
               certificates of deposit bearing a reasonable rate of interest in
               any such depositary.

          (d)  To invest, subject to the limitations of subparagraph (b) above,
               in any common or commingled trust fund or funds maintained or
               administered by the trustee solely for the investment of trust
               funds.

          (e)  To borrow from anyone, with the administrator's approval, such
               sum or sums from time to time as the trustee considers desirable
               to carry out this trust, and to mortgage or pledge all or part of
               the trust fund as security.

          (f)  To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
               liability for interest and to decline to make payment or delivery
               thereof until final adjudication by a court of competent
               jurisdiction or until an appropriate release is obtained.

          (g)  To begin, maintain or defend any litigation necessary in
               connection with the administration of this trust, except that the
               trustee shall not be obliged or required to do so unless
               indemnified to the trustee's satisfaction.

          (h)  To compromise, contest, settle or abandon claims or demands.

<PAGE>

          (i)  To give proxies to vote stocks and other voting securities, to
               join in or oppose (alone or jointly with others) voting trusts,
               mergers, consolidations, foreclosures, reorganizations,
               liquidations, or other changes in the financial structure of any
               corporation, and to exercise or sell stock subscription or
               conversion rights.

          (j)  To hold securities or other property in the name of a nominee, in
               a depositary, or in any other way, with or without disclosing the
               trust relationship.

          (k)  To divide or distribute the trust fund in undivided interests or
               wholly or partly in kind.

          (l)  To pay any tax imposed on or with respect to the trust; to defer
               making payment of any such tax if it is indemnified to its
               satisfaction in the premises; and to require before making any
               payment such release or other document from any lawful taxing
               authority and such indemnity from the intended payee as the
               trustee considers necessary for its Protection.

          (m)  To deal without restriction with the legal representative of the
               grantor's estate or the trustee or other legal representative of
               any trust created by the grantor or a trust or estate in which a
               beneficiary has an interest, even though the trustee,
               individually, shall be acting in such other capacity, without
               liability for any loss that may result.

          (n)  To appoint or remove by written instrument any bank or
               corporation qualified to act as successor trustee, wherever
               located, as special trustee as to part or all of the trust fund,
               including property as to which the trustee does not act, and such
               special trustee, except as specifically limited or provided by
               this or the appointing instrument, shall have all of the rights,
               titles, powers, duties, discretions and immunities of the
               trustee, without liability for any action taken or omitted to be
               taken under this or the appointing instrument.

          (o)  To appoint or remove by written instrument any bank, wherever
               located, as custodian of part or all of the trust fund, and each
               such custodian shall have such rights, powers, duties and
               discretions as are delegated to it by the trustee.

          (p)  To employ agents, attorneys, accountants or other persons, and to
               delegate to them such powers as the trustee considers desirable,
               and the trustee shall be protected in acting or refraining from
               acting on the advice of Persons so employed without court action.

          (q)  To perform any and all other acts which in the trustee's judgment
               are appropriate for the proper management, investment and
               distribution of the trust fund.

     III-2.  PRINCIPAL AND INCOME.  Any income earned on the trust fund which 
is not distributed as provided in Article II shall be accumulated and from time 
to time added to the principal of the trust.  The grantor's interest in the 
trust shall include all assets or other property held by the trustee hereunder, 
including principal and accumulated income.

<PAGE>

     III-3.  STATEMENTS.  The trustee shall prepare and deliver monthly to the 
administrator and annually to the grantor, if then living, otherwise to each 
beneficiary then entitled to distributions under this agreement, a statement 
(or series of statements) setting forth (or which taken together set forth) all 
investments, receipts, disbursements and other transactions effected by the 
trustee during the reporting period; and showing the trust fund and the value 
thereof at the end of such period.

     III-4.  COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.  All reasonable costs, charges and 
expenses incurred in the administration of this trust, including compensation 
to the trustee, any compensation to agents, attorneys, accountants and other 
persons employed by the trustee, and expenses incurred in connection with the 
sale, investment and reinvestment of the trust fund shall be paid from the 
trust fund.

                                   ARTICLE IV
                               GENERAL PROVISIONS

     IV-1.  INTERESTS NOT TRANSFERABLE.  The interests of the grantor or other 
persons entitled to distributions hereunder are not subject to their debts or 
other obligations and may not be voluntarily or involuntarily sold, 
transferred, alienated, assigned or encumbered.

     IV-2.  DISAGREEMENT AS TO ACTS.  If there is a disagreement between the 
trustee and anyone as to any act or transaction reported in any accounting, the 
trustee shall have the right to a settlement of its account by any proper court.

     IV-3.  TRUSTEE'S OBLIGATIONS.  No power, duty or responsibility is imposed 
on the trustee except as set forth in this agreement.  The trustee is not 
obliged to determine whether funds delivered to or distributions from the trust 
are proper under the trust, or whether any tax is due or payable as a result of 
any such delivery or distribution.  The trustee shall be protected in making 
any distribution from the trust as directed pursuant to Article II without 
inquiring as to whether the distributee is entitled thereto; and the trustee 
shall not be liable for any distribution made in good faith without written 
notice or knowledge that the distribution is not proper under the terms of this 
agreement.

     IV-4.  GOOD FAITH ACTIONS.  The trustee's exercise or non-exercise of its 
powers and discretions in good faith shall be conclusive on all persons.  No 
one shall be obliged to see to the application of any money paid or property 
delivered to the trustee.  The certificate of the trustee that it is acting 
according to this agreement will fully protect all persons dealing with the 
trustee.

<PAGE>

     IV-5.  WAIVER OF NOTICE.  Any notice required under this agreement may be 
waived by the Person entitled to such notice.

     IV-6.  CONTROLLING LAW.  The laws of the State of Illinois shall govern 
the interpretation and validity of the provisions of this agreement and all 
questions relating to the management, administration, investment and 
distribution of the trust hereby created.

<PAGE>

     IV-7.  SUCCESSORS.  This agreement shall be binding on all persons 
entitled to distributions hereunder and their respective heirs and legal 
representatives, and on the trustee and its successors.

                                   ARTICLE V
                               CHANGES IN TRUSTEE

     V-1.  RESIGNATION OR REMOVAL OF TRUSTEE.  The trustee may resign at any 
time by giving thirty days' advance written notice to the administrator and the 
grantor.  The administrator may remove a trustee by written notice to the 
trustee and the grantor.

     V-2.  APPOINTMENT OF SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE.  The administrator shall fill any 
vacancy in the office of trustee as soon as practicable by written notice to 
the successor trustee; and shall give prompt written notice thereof to the 
grantor, if then living, otherwise to each beneficiary then entitled to 
payments or distributions under this agreement.  A successor trustee shall be a 
bank (as defined in Section 581 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended).

     V-3.  DUTIES OF RESIGNING OR REMOVED TRUSTEE AND OF SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE.  A 
trustee that resigns or is removed shall furnish promptly to the administrator 
and the successor trustee an account of its administration of the trust from 
the date of its last account.  Each successor trustee shall succeed to the 
title to the trust fund vested in its predecessor without the signing or filing 
of any instrument, but each predecessor trustee shall execute all documents and 
do all acts necessary to vest such title of record in the successor trustee.  
Each successor trustee shall have all the powers conferred by this agreement as 
if originally named trustee.  No successor trustee shall be personally liable 
for any act or failure to act of a predecessor trustee.  With the approval of 
the administrator, a successor trustee may accept the account furnished and the 
property delivered by a predecessor trustee without incurring any liability for 
so doing, and such acceptance will be complete discharge to the predecessor 
trustee.

                                   ARTICLE VI
                           AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION

     VI-1.  AMENDMENT.  With the consent of the administrator, this trust may 
be amended from time to time by the grantor, if then living, otherwise by a 
majority of the beneficiaries then entitled to payments or distributions 
hereunder, except as follows:

          (a)  The duties and liabilities of the trustee cannot be changed
               substantially without its consent.

          (b)  This trust may not be amended so as to make the trust revocable.

     VI-2.  TERMINATION.  This trust shall not terminate, and all rights, 
titles, powers, duties, discretions and immunities imposed on or reserved to 
the trustee, the administrator, the grantor

<PAGE>

and the beneficiaries shall continue in effect, until all assets of the trust 
have been distributed by the trustee as provided in Article II.

     IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the grantor and the trustee have executed this 
agreement as of the day and year first above written.


                      ------------------------------------------
                      Grantor

                      The Northern Trust Company, as Trustee


                      By
                        ----------------------------------------


                      Its
                         ---------------------------------------

</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-10.11
<SEQUENCE>4
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 10.11
<TEXT>

<PAGE>


December 23, 1998



Mr. Duane L. Burnham
15 Bridlewood Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-4707

Dear Duane:

You shall be entitled to participate in all applicable Abbott employee 
benefit plans (including Abbott's stock option plans) in accordance with 
their terms, based on your compensation and service with Abbott as an 
employee through April 30, 1999 and as a retiree thereafter (including 
coverage for yourself and your eligible dependants under normal Abbott 
retiree medical and dental coverage and retiree life insurance under the 
normal provisions of the Abbott plans as they may be in effect from time to 
time).

In recognition of your successful completion of management succession ahead 
of schedule, Abbott will pay you, in the form of a payment for consultation 
described below, a total of $2,205,000 on April 23, 1999, with $705,000 being 
paid in cash and $1,500,000 being deposited into your grantor trust net of 
pro forma income taxes, which will be paid to you in cash. Also, in addition 
to the pension you shall receive under the Annuity Retirement Plan and 
Supplemental Pension Plan, starting May 31, 1999, you shall receive a monthly 
pension in the amount of $6,238.08 in the form of a single life annuity. 
During the first week of January, 1999, the present value of this amount, 
which is estimated to be $754,175.24, shall be funded in a manner consistent 
with the grantor trust you established under the Supplemental Pension Plan.

Beginning May 1, 1999 and ending December 31, 1999, you agree to make 
yourself available for consultation with the Board of 



                                     
<PAGE>




Mr. Duane L. Burnham
December 23, 1998
Page 2

Directors, any committee or member thereof, or any elected officer of Abbott, 
as may be reasonably  requested from time to time by the Chairman of the 
Board of Directors. Abbott will reimburse you for all reasonable travel, 
lodging and sustenance expenses incurred by you at the request of Abbott for 
such consultation.

Sincerely,



Jose M. de Lasa


                                        AGREED



                                        -------------------------------
                                            Duane L. Burnham
JmdL:ras
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-12
<SEQUENCE>5
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 12
<TEXT>

<PAGE>

                                                                      EXHIBIT 12

                        Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                 CALCULATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
                                    (Unaudited)

                        (dollars in millions except ratios)



<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                      Year Ended December 31
                                                          ---------------------------------------------
                                                           1998      1997      1996      1995      1994
                                                           ----      ----      ----      ----      ----
<S>                                                      <C>       <C>      <C>        <C>       <C>
Net Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   $2,333    $2,094    $1,882    $1,689    $1,517


Add (deduct):

Income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      907       855       788       706       650

Capitalized interest cost, net of amortization . . . .        1        (1)       (4)       (7)       (7)

Equity in earnings of 20% -49% owned companies,
less dividends received. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        0         0         0         2         0

Minority interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7        11        16        18        12
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------
Net earnings as adjusted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   $3,248    $2,959    $2,682    $2,408    $2,172
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------


Fixed Charges:

Interest on long-term and short-term debt. . . . . . .     $160      $135       $95       $70       $50

Capitalized interest cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14        14        16        19        18

Rental expense representative of an interest factor. .       40        29        26        26        26
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------


Total Fixed Charges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      214       178       137       115        94
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------


Total adjusted earnings available for
payment of fixed charges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   $3,462    $3,137    $2,819    $2,523    $2,266
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------


Ratio of earnings to fixed charges . . . . . . . . . .     16.2      17.6      20.6      21.9      24.1
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------
                                                         ------    ------    ------    ------    ------
</TABLE>


     NOTE: For the purpose of calculating this ratio, (i) earnings have been
     calculated by adjusting net earnings for taxes on earnings; interest
     expense; capitalized interest cost, net of amortization; minority interest;
     and the portion of rentals representative of the interest factor, (ii) 
     the company considers one-third of rental expense to be the amount 
     representing return on capital, and (iii) fixed charges comprise total
     interest expense, including capitalized interest and such portion of
     rentals.

</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-13
<SEQUENCE>6
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 13
<TEXT>

<PAGE>

                                                                      Exhibit 13
The portions of the Abbott Laboratories Annual Report for the year ended
December 31, 1998 captioned Consolidated Statement of Earnings, Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows, Consolidated Balance Sheet, Consolidated Statement of
Shareholders' Investment, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Report of
Independent Public Accountants, Financial Instruments and Risk Management,
Financial Review, and the applicable portions of the section captioned Summary
of Financial Data for the years 1994 through 1998.


                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                          CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF EARNINGS

               (dollars and shares in thousands except per share data)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                               Year Ended December 31
                                                      -----------------------------------------
                                                         1998           1997            1996
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
<S>                                                   <C>            <C>            <C>
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $12,477,845    $11,883,462    $11,013,460
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------

Cost of products sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5,394,441      5,045,678      4,731,998
Research and development . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,221,593      1,302,403      1,204,841
Selling, general and administrative. . . . . . . .      2,743,888      2,684,955      2,459,560
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
   Total Operating Cost and Expenses . . . . . . .      9,359,922      9,033,036      8,396,399
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------

Operating Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3,117,923      2,850,426      2,617,061
Net interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        104,118         86,802         50,924
Income from TAP Holdings Inc. joint venture  . . .       (266,347)      (189,497)      (129,717)
Net foreign exchange (gain) loss . . . . . . . . .         31,158         (9,048)        21,827
Other (income) expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . .          8,395         12,223          4,477
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
   Earnings Before Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3,240,599      2,949,946      2,669,550

Taxes on earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        907,368        855,484        787,517
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
Net Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $ 2,333,231    $ 2,094,462    $ 1,882,033
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------

Basic Earnings Per Common Share. . . . . . . . . .          $1.53          $1.36          $1.20
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
Diluted Earnings Per Common Share. . . . . . . . .          $1.51          $1.34          $1.19
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
Average Number of Common Shares Outstanding
   Used for Basic Earnings Per Common Share. . . .      1,522,702      1,539,746      1,562,494

Dilutive Common Stock Options    . . . . . . . . .         22,956         21,716         18,098
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------

Average Number of Common Shares Outstanding
   Plus Dilutive Common Stock Options. . . . . . .      1,545,658      1,561,462      1,580,592
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
Outstanding Common Stock Options
   Having No Dilutive Effect . . . . . . . . . . .            657          2,216            600
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                      -----------    -----------    -----------
</TABLE>

The accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part
of this statement.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                         CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS

                                (dollars in thousands)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                Year Ended December 31
                                                                      ----------------------------------------
                                                                         1998           1997           1996
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
<S>                                                                   <C>            <C>            <C>
Cash Flow From (Used in) Operating Activities:
  Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $2,333,231     $2,094,462     $1,882,033
  Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to
  net cash from operating activities -
  Depreciation and amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         784,243        727,754        686,085
  Exchange (gains) losses, net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         (14,176)        31,005         (3,419)
  Investing and financing (gains) losses, net. . . . . . . . . .          90,798        113,999         57,224
  Trade receivables. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (143,470)      (222,427)      (163,621)
  Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (111,649)       (98,964)      (125,726)
  Prepaid expenses and other assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (239,533)      (491,769)      (303,766)
  Trade accounts payable and other liabilities . . . . . . . . .         178,979        485,407        342,407
  Income taxes payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (145,522)       (10,700)        10,845
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
    Net Cash From Operating Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . .       2,732,901      2,628,767      2,382,062
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------

Cash Flow From (Used in) Investing Activities:
  Acquisition of International Murex in 1998, Sanofi's parenteral 
       products businesses in 1997, and MediSense in 1996,
       net of cash acquired. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (249,177)      (200,475)      (830,559)
  Acquisitions of property, equipment and other businesses . . .        (990,619)    (1,007,296)      (949,028)
  Purchases of investment securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (278,002)       (25,115)      (312,535)
  Proceeds from sales of investment securities . . . . . . . . .          78,898         43,424        117,783
  Other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18,034         (8,209)        19,098
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
    Net Cash Used in Investing Activities. . . . . . . . . . . .      (1,420,866)    (1,197,671)    (1,955,241)
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------

Cash Flow From (Used in) Financing Activities:
  Proceeds from (repayments of) commercial paper, net. . . . . .          42,000        402,000        317,000
  Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt . . . . . . . . . . .         400,000              -        500,000
  Other borrowing transactions, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         (59,499)        16,085         18,037
  Purchases of common shares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (875,407)    (1,054,512)      (808,816)
  Proceeds from stock options exercised. . . . . . . . . . . . .         150,881        137,482        109,638
  Dividends paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (891,661)      (809,554)      (728,147)
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
    Net Cash Used in Financing Activities. . . . . . . . . . . .      (1,233,686)    (1,308,499)      (592,288)
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                   CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (CONTINUED)

                                (dollars in thousands)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                Year Ended December 31
                                                       ----------------------------------------
                                                          1998           1997            1996
                                                       ----------      ---------      ---------
<S>                                                    <C>             <C>            <C>
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and
  cash equivalents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           (143)        (2,782)        (5,521)
                                                       ----------      ---------      ---------

Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents       78,206        119,815       (170,988)
Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year . . .        230,024        110,209        281,197
                                                        ---------      ---------      ---------
Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year . . . . . .     $  308,230      $ 230,024      $ 110,209
                                                       ----------      ---------      ---------
                                                       ----------      ---------      ---------

Supplemental Cash Flow Information:
  Income taxes paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $1,060,479      $ 922,242      $ 801,107
  Interest paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        153,875        132,645         89,509

</TABLE>


The accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part
of this statement.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                              CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET

                                (dollars in thousands)

                                        ASSETS
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                               December 31
                                                                -----------------------------------------
                                                                    1998           1997           1996
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
<S>                                                             <C>            <C>            <C>
Current Assets:
  Cash and cash equivalents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $   308,230    $   230,024    $   110,209
  Investment securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         75,087         28,986         12,875
  Trade receivables, less allowances of -
    1998: $190,952; 1997: $167,406; 1996: $153,424 . . . . .      1,950,058      1,782,326      1,708,807
  Inventories -
    Finished products. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        697,494        667,355        627,449
    Work in process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        345,776        287,653        269,443
    Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        367,339        324,892        341,313
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
      Total inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,410,609      1,279,900      1,238,205

  Prepaid income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        847,154        800,591        708,402
  Other prepaid expenses and receivables . . . . . . . . . .        961,998        916,381        702,404
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
     Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5,553,136      5,038,208      4,480,902
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Investment Securities Maturing after One Year. . . . . . . .        783,842        630,967        665,553
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Property and Equipment, at Cost:
  Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        165,474        152,791        156,038
  Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,860,068      1,746,772      1,621,036
  Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7,099,092      6,486,512      6,142,139
  Construction in progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        271,602        404,082        451,070
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                                  9,396,236      8,790,157      8,370,283
  Less: accumulated depreciation and amortization. . . . . .      4,657,393      4,220,466      3,908,740
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
  Net Property and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4,738,843      4,569,691      4,461,543

Net Intangible Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,349,822      1,112,126        979,793
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Deferred Charges and Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . .        790,570        710,076        537,809
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                                $13,216,213    $12,061,068    $11,125,600
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
</TABLE>


The accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part
of this statement.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                              CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET

                                (dollars in thousands)

                       LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' INVESTMENT
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                               December 31
                                                                -----------------------------------------
                                                                    1998           1997           1996
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
<S>                                                             <C>            <C>            <C>
Current Liabilities:
  Short-term borrowings and current portion of
       long-term debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $ 1,759,076    $ 1,781,352    $ 1,383,727
  Trade accounts payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,056,641      1,001,058        923,018
  Salaries, wages and commissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . .        374,262        332,914        322,292
  Other accrued liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,378,707      1,406,132      1,206,552
  Dividends payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        227,400        201,450        185,866
  Income taxes payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        166,040        311,562        322,262
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
     Total Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4,962,126      5,034,468      4,343,717
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,339,694        937,983        932,898
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Deferred Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        108,964        136,514        153,279
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Other Liabilities and Deferrals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,091,768        953,426        875,524
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------

Shareholders' Investment:
  Preferred shares, one dollar par value
    Authorized - 1,000,000 shares, none issued . . . . . . .              -              -              -
  Common shares, without par value
    Authorized - 2,400,000,000 shares
    Issued at stated capital amount -
    Shares: 1998: 1,533,774,332; 1997: 1,546,468,504;
    1996: 1,568,075,716. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1,231,079        907,106        694,380
  Common shares held in treasury, at cost -
    Shares: 1998: 17,710,838; 1997: 18,280,398;
    1996: 19,177,264 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (46,735)       (48,238)       (50,605)
  Unearned compensation - restricted stock awards. . . . . .        (25,331)       (25,532)        (7,627)
  Earnings and other comprehensive
       income employed in the business . . . . . . . . . . .      4,554,648      4,165,341      4,184,034
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
    Total Shareholders' Investment . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5,713,661      4,998,677      4,820,182
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                                $13,216,213    $12,061,068    $11,125,600
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
                                                                -----------    -----------    -----------
</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                  CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDERS' INVESTMENT

                     (dollars in thousands except per share data)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                              Year Ended December 31
                                                                                     ----------------------------------------
                                                                                        1998           1997           1996
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
<S>                                                                                  <C>            <C>            <C>
Common Shares:
  Beginning of Year
   Shares: 1998: 1,546,468,504; 1997: 1,568,075,716; 1996: 1,594,042,422 . . . .     $  907,106     $  694,380     $  581,562
  Issued under incentive stock programs
   Shares: 1998: 13,641,871; 1997: 15,268,426; 1996: 10,207,402. . . . . . . . .        257,249        177,395        105,648
  Tax benefit from option shares and vesting of restricted stock awards
   (no share effect) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         85,070         53,866         21,589
  Retired - Shares: 1998: 26,336,043; 1997: 36,875,638; 1996: 36,174,108 . . . .        (18,346)       (18,535)       (14,419)
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
  End of Year
   Shares: 1998: 1,533,774,332; 1997: 1,546,468,504; 1996: 1,568,075,716 . . . .     $1,231,079     $  907,106     $  694,380
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------

Common Shares Held in Treasury:
  Beginning of Year
   Shares: 1998: 18,280,398; 1997: 19,177,264; 1996: 19,428,758. . . . . . . . .     $  (48,238)    $  (50,605)    $  (51,268)
  Issued under incentive stock programs 
   Shares: 1998: 569,560; 1997: 896,866; 1996: 251,494 . . . . . . . . . . . . .          1,503          2,367            663
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
  End of Year
   Shares: 1998: 17,710,838; 1997: 18,280,398; 1996: 19,177,264. . . . . . . . .     $  (46,735)    $  (48,238)    $  (50,605)
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------

Unearned Compensation - Restricted Stock Awards:
  Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $  (25,532)    $   (7,627)    $   (4,718)
  Issued at market value - Shares: 1998: 554,000; 1997: 888,000; 1996: 237,600 .        (20,584)       (25,914)        (5,881)
  Lapses - Shares: 1998: 22,000; 1996: 12,000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            705              -            308
  Amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20,080          8,009          2,664
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
  End of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $  (25,331)    $  (25,532)    $   (7,627)
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------

Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income Employed in the Business:
  Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $4,165,341     $4,184,034     $3,871,271
  Comprehensive income:
   Net earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      2,333,231      2,094,462      1,882,033
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
   Other comprehensive income (loss):
   Foreign currency translation adjustments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          1,504       (183,886)       (23,101)
   Unrealized gains on marketable equity securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            991          3,025         15,000
   Tax benefit (expense) related to items of other comprehensive income. . . . .             45         (1,210)        (6,023)
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
       Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax . . . . . . . . . . .          2,540       (182,071)       (14,124)
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
  Comprehensive income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      2,335,771      1,912,391      1,867,909
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
  Cash dividends declared on common shares
    (per share -1998: $.60; 1997: $.54; 1996: $.48). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       (917,611)      (825,138)      (748,659)
  Cost of common shares retired in excess of stated capital amount . . . . . . .     (1,048,500)    (1,129,757)      (811,996)
  Cost of treasury shares issued below market value of restricted stock awards .         19,647         23,811          5,509
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
  End of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $4,554,648     $4,165,341     $4,184,034
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
                                                                                     ----------     ----------     ----------
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

            CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDERS' INVESTMENT (CONTINUED)

                     (dollars in thousands except per share data)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                         Year Ended December 31
                                                                                ----------------------------------------
                                                                                   1998           1997           1996
                                                                                ----------     ----------     ----------
<S>                                                                             <C>            <C>            <C>
Supplemental Comprehensive Income Information:
Cumulative foreign currency translation loss adjustments, net of tax            $  260,711     $  262,656     $   78,770
Cumulative unrealized (gains) on marketable equity securities, net of tax          (33,010)       (32,415)       (30,600)

</TABLE>


The accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements are an integral part
of this statement.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                      NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies

NATURE OF BUSINESS AND CONCENTRATION OF RISK - The Company's principal business
is the discovery, development, manufacture and sale of a broad line of health
care products and services.  Due to the nature of the Company's operations, it
is not subject to significant concentration risks relating to customers,
products or geographic locations.

BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION - The consolidated financial statements include the
accounts of the parent company and subsidiaries, after elimination of
intercompany transactions.  The accounts of foreign subsidiaries are
consolidated as of November 30 due to the time needed to consolidate these
subsidiaries.  No events occurred related to these foreign subsidiaries in
December 1998, 1997, and 1996 which materially affected the financial position
or results of operations.

USE OF ESTIMATES - The financial statements have been prepared in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles and necessarily include amounts
based on estimates and assumptions by management.  Actual results could differ
from those amounts.  Significant estimates include amounts for litigation,
income taxes, sales rebates and inventory and accounts receivable exposures.

CASH, CASH EQUIVALENTS AND INVESTMENT SECURITIES - Cash equivalents consist of
time deposits and certificates of deposit with original maturities of three
months or less.  Investments in marketable equity securities are classified as
available-for-sale and are recorded at fair value with any unrealized holding
gains or losses, net of tax, included as a component of earnings and other
comprehensive income employed in the business.  Investments in debt securities
are classified as held-to-maturity, as management has both the intent and
ability to hold these securities to maturity, and are reported at cost, net of
any unamortized premium or discount.  Income relating to these securities is
reported as interest income.

INVENTORIES - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out
basis) or market.  Cost includes material and conversion costs.

PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT - Depreciation and amortization are provided on a
straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.  In 1998, the
Company elected early adoption of the provisions of the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants' Statement of Position 98-1, "Accounting for the
Costs of Computer Software Developed or Obtained for Internal Use."  This
statement requires capitalization of certain costs incurred in the development
of internal-use software.  Adoption of the provisions of this statement did not
have a material effect on the financial statements of the Company.  The
following table shows estimated useful lives of property and equipment:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
               Classification            Expected Useful Lives
               --------------      ---------------------------------
               <S>                 <C>
               Buildings           10 to 50 years (average 29 years)
               Equipment            3 to 20 years (average 11 years)
</TABLE>

Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.  If the
fair value is less than the carrying amount of the asset, a loss is recognized
for the difference.

INTANGIBLE ASSETS - Intangible assets, primarily purchased intangible assets and
goodwill resulting from business acquisitions, are amortized on a straight-line
basis over up to 40 years.  Accumulated amortization as of December 31, 1998,
1997, and 1996, was $163 million, $98 million, and $55 million, respectively.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


PRODUCT LIABILITY - Provisions are made for the portions of probable losses that
are not covered by product liability insurance.

TRANSLATION ADJUSTMENTS - For foreign operations in highly inflationary
economies, translation gains and losses are included in net foreign exchange
(gain) loss.  For remaining foreign operations, translation adjustments are
included as a component of earnings and other comprehensive income employed in
the business.

REVENUE RECOGNITION - Revenue from product sales is recognized upon shipment to
customers.  Provisions for discounts and rebates to customers, and returns and
other adjustments are provided for in the same period the related sales are
recorded.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - Internal research and development costs are expensed
as incurred.  Third-party research and development costs are expensed when the
contracted work has been performed or as milestone results have been achieved.

COMPREHENSIVE INCOME - In 1998, the Company adopted the provisions of Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 130, "Reporting Comprehensive Income."  As
a result, certain balance sheet reclassifications were made to previously
reported amounts to achieve the required presentation of comprehensive income.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 2 - Supplemental Financial Information
(dollars in thousands)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

                                                               1998            1997           1996
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
<S>                                                         <C>              <C>            <C>
Other prepaid expenses and receivables 
Receivables purchased from TAP Holdings Inc.
  under a factoring agreement. . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  310,993       $344,979       $255,455
All other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         651,005        571,402        446,949
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  961,998       $916,381       $702,404
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
                                                            ----------       --------       --------

Other liabilities and deferrals
Accrued post-employment costs. . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  477,417       $409,169       $342,582
All other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         614,351        544,257        532,942
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $1,091,768       $953,426       $875,524
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
                                                            ----------       --------       --------

Net interest expense
Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  159,839       $134,550       $ 95,445
Interest income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         (55,721)       (47,748)       (44,521)
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  104,118       $ 86,802       $ 50,924
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
                                                            ----------       --------       --------
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 3 - Taxes on Earnings
(dollars in thousands)

Deferred income taxes reflect the tax consequences on future years of temporary
differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial
reporting amounts.  U.S. income taxes are provided on those earnings of foreign
subsidiaries and subsidiaries operating in Puerto Rico under tax incentive
grants, which are intended to be remitted to the parent company.  Undistributed
earnings reinvested indefinitely in foreign subsidiaries as working capital and
plant and equipment aggregated $1,818,000 at December 31, 1998.  Deferred income
taxes not provided on these earnings would be approximately $356,000.

     Earnings before taxes, and the related provisions for taxes on earnings,
were as follows:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

Earnings Before Taxes                                                    1998           1997           1996
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
<S>                                                                   <C>            <C>            <C>
  Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $2,519,719     $2,236,393     $1,934,872
  Foreign. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       720,880        713,553        734,678
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $3,240,599     $2,949,946     $2,669,550
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------

<CAPTION>
Taxes on Earnings                                                        1998           1997           1996
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
<S>                                                                   <C>            <C>            <C>
  Current:
    U.S. Federal and Possessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $743,980       $717,156       $573,208
    State. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        49,869         71,447         62,835
    Foreign. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       184,100        171,259        207,512
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
  Total current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       977,949        959,862        843,555
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------

  Deferred:
    Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       (92,681)      (130,634)       (68,762)
    Foreign. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        25,219         26,836         13,338
    Enacted tax rate changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (3,119)          (580)          (614)
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
  Total deferred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       (70,581)      (104,378)       (56,038)
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $907,368       $855,484       $787,517
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
                                                                      ----------     ----------     ----------
</TABLE>

Differences between the effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory tax
rate were as follows:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                            1998           1997           1996
                                                                            ----           ----           ----
<S>                                                                         <C>            <C>            <C>
Statutory tax rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          35.0%          35.0%          35.0%
Benefit of tax exemptions in Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic,
  Ireland, the Netherlands, and Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          (4.9)          (6.1)          (6.5)
State taxes, net of federal benefit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           1.0            1.6            1.5
Domestic dividend exclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          (2.3)          (1.8)          (1.4)
All other, net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          (0.8)           0.3            0.9
                                                                            ----           ----           ----
Effective tax rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          28.0%          29.0%          29.5%
                                                                            ----           ----           ----
                                                                            ----           ----           ----
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


As of December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, total deferred tax assets were
$1,269,441, $1,144,915, and $997,036, respectively, and total deferred tax
liabilities were $487,207, $461,943, and $427,412, respectively.  Valuation
allowances for deferred tax assets were not significant.  The temporary
differences that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities were as
follows:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

Investment Securities Maturing after One Year                             1998           1997           1996
                                                                       ---------      ---------      ---------
<S>                                                                    <C>            <C>            <C>
Compensation and employee benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       $ 254,026      $ 205,423      $ 185,537
Trade receivable reserves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         173,525        176,070        130,692
Inventory reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         115,693        119,398        122,522
Deferred intercompany profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         177,515        135,211        112,467
State income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26,585         32,442         30,343
Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        (197,832)      (196,233)      (184,270)
Other, primarily other accruals and reserves not currently
  deductible, and the excess of book basis over tax basis
  of intangible assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         188,678        191,766        157,832
                                                                       ---------      ---------      ---------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       $ 738,190      $ 664,077      $ 555,123
                                                                       ---------      ---------      ---------
                                                                       ---------      ---------      ---------
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 4 - Investment Securities
(dollars in thousands)

The following is a summary of investment securities at December 31:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

Current Investment Securities                                        1998           1997           1996
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
<S>                                                                <C>            <C>            <C>
 Time deposits and certificates of deposit . . . . . . . . .       $ 50,000       $ 25,700       $    800
 Other, primarily debt obligations issued or guaranteed
    by various governments or government agencies. . . . . .         25,087          3,286         12,075
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       $ 75,087       $ 28,986       $ 12,875
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
                                                                   --------       --------       --------

<CAPTION>
Investment Securities Maturing after One Year                        1998           1997           1996
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
<S>                                                                <C>            <C>            <C>
 Time deposits and certificates of deposit,
    maturing through 2001. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       $486,500       $406,500       $432,200
 Corporate debt obligations, maturing through 2008 . . . . .        112,320         82,143         84,310
 Debt obligations issued or guaranteed
    by various governments or government agencies,
    maturing through 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        185,022        142,324        149,043
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       $783,842       $630,967       $665,553
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
                                                                   --------       --------       --------
</TABLE>


The Company has both the intent and ability to hold the above investment
securities until maturity, and therefore they are classified as held-to-maturity
securities.  All investment securities classified as current as of December 31,
1998, mature in 1999.

     Of the investment securities listed above, $858,809, $656,634, and
$676,251, were held at December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, respectively, by
subsidiaries operating in Puerto Rico under tax incentive grants expiring from
2002 through 2007.  In addition, these subsidiaries held cash equivalents of
$74,900 and $81,100 at December 31, 1998, and 1997, respectively.

     The Company maintains a portfolio of available-for-sale equity securities
from strategic technology acquisitions which are included in deferred charges
and other assets.  The fair value of marketable equity securities is $98,075,
$83,083, and $58,691, and the cost basis of nonmarketable equity securities is
$75,901, $50,202 and $28,457 as of December 31, 1998, 1997 and 1996,
respectively.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 5 - Post-Employment Benefits
(dollars in thousands)

Retirement plans consist of defined benefit, defined contribution, and medical
and dental plans.

     Information for the Company's major defined benefit plans and 
post-employment medical and dental benefit plans is as follows:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                 Defined Benefit Plans                Medical and Dental Plans
                                                         -----------------------------------    ----------------------------------
                                                            1998         1997        1996          1998        1997         1996
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
<S>                                                      <C>          <C>         <C>           <C>         <C>          <C>
Projected benefit obligations, January 1 . . . . . . .   $2,000,329   $1,771,191  $1,494,348    $ 646,448   $ 599,631    $ 556,969
Service cost - benefits earned during the year . . . .      108,754       97,272      81,243       30,664      28,274       28,302
Interest cost on projected benefit obligations . . . .      140,287      128,404     111,449       43,770      42,167       40,822
Actuarial loss (gain), primarily changes in discount
  rate and lower than estimated health care costs. . .      182,829       95,495     154,993       18,057      (5,389)      (9,149)
Benefits paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      (85,722)     (77,722)    (66,776)     (23,993)    (18,235)     (17,313)
Other, primarily translation . . . . . . . . . . . . .        2,143      (14,311)     (4,066)         ...         ...          ...
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
Projected benefit obligations, December 31 . . . . . .   $2,348,620   $2,000,329  $1,771,191    $ 714,946   $ 646,448    $ 599,631
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
Plans' assets at fair value, January 1,
  principally listed securities. . . . . . . . . . . .   $2,192,486   $1,828,989  $1,600,368      $86,600     $87,719      $95,530
Actual return on plans' assets . . . . . . . . . . . .      426,023      373,405     224,624       18,656      17,009        9,372
Company contributions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18,945       76,083      69,674        1,265         107          130
Benefits paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      (85,722)     (77,722)    (66,776)     (23,993)    (18,235)     (17,313)
Other, primarily translation . . . . . . . . . . . . .         (761)      (8,269)      1,099          ...         ...          ...
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
Plans' assets at fair value, December 31,
  principally listed securities. . . . . . . . . . . .   $2,550,971   $2,192,486  $1,828,989      $82,528     $86,600      $87,719
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------    --------     --------
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------

Projected benefit obligations less than (greater than)
  plans' assets, December 31 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   $  202,351   $  192,157  $   57,798    $(632,418)  $(559,848)   $(511,912)
Unrecognized actuarial (gains) losses, net . . . . . .     (143,876)     (78,522)     51,531      137,701     133,379      152,030
Unrecognized prior service cost. . . . . . . . . . . .        6,134        9,053      11,968          ...         ...          ...
Unrecognized transition obligation . . . . . . . . . .      (21,015)     (32,085)    (42,728)         ...         ...          ...
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
Prepaid (accrued) benefit cost . . . . . . . . . . . .   $   43,594   $   90,603  $   78,569    $(494,717)  $(426,469)   $(359,882)
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------

Service cost - benefits earned during the year . . . .   $  108,754   $   97,272     $81,243      $30,664     $28,274      $28,302
Interest cost on projected benefit obligations . . . .      140,287      128,404     111,449       43,770      42,167       40,822
Expected return on plans' assets . . . . . . . . . . .     (179,194)    (148,250)   (136,062)      (7,211)     (7,035)      (7,793)
Net amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       (7,728)      (7,154)     (7,464)       2,290       3,288        5,549
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
Net cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   $   62,119   $   70,272  $   49,166    $  69,513   $  66,694    $  66,880
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
                                                         ----------   ----------  ----------    ---------   ---------    ---------
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


The projected benefit obligations for certain foreign defined benefit plans that
do not have plan assets were $62,719, $52,841, and $69,337 at December 31, 1998,
1997, and 1996, respectively.

Assumptions used for major benefit plans as of December 31 include:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                            1998           1997           1996
                                                                           -----          -----          -----
<S>                                                                        <C>            <C>            <C>
Discount rate for determining obligations and interest cost. . . . . .     6 3/4%         7 1/4%         7 1/2%
Expected aggregate average long-term change in compensation. . . . . .         5%             5%             5%
Expected long-term rate of return on assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9 1/2%         9 1/2%             9%

</TABLE>


A five percent annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered health
care benefits is assumed.

     A one-percentage point increase/(decrease) in the assumed health care 
cost trend rate would increase/(decrease) the accumulated post-employment 
benefit obligations as of December 31, 1998, by approximately 
$139,214/($114,623), and the total of the service and interest cost 
components of net post-employment health care cost for the year then ended by 
approximately $17,612/($14,289).

     The Stock Retirement Plan is the principal defined contribution plan.
Company contributions to this plan were $66,911 in 1998, $60,838 in 1997, and
$54,883 in 1996, equal to 7.33 percent of dividends declared, as provided under
the plan.

     The Company provides certain other post-employment benefits, primarily
salary continuation plans, to qualifying domestic employees, and accrues for the
related cost over the service lives of the employees.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 6 - Financial Instruments and Derivatives

The Company enters into foreign currency forward exchange contracts to hedge 
intercompany loans and trade accounts payable where the receivable or payable 
is denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the 
entity.  Such contracts are also used to hedge foreign currency denominated 
third-party trade payables and receivables.  For intercompany loans, the 
contracts require the Company to sell foreign currencies, primarily European 
currencies and Japanese yen, in exchange for primarily U.S. dollars and other 
European currencies.  For intercompany and trade payables and receivables, 
the currencies hedged are primarily the U.S. dollar, European currencies and 
Japanese yen.  At December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, the Company held $1.6 
billion, $1.3 billion, and $1.0 billion, respectively, of foreign currency 
forward exchange contracts.  The contracts outstanding at December 31, 1998, 
mature in 1999.  These contracts are marked to market each month.  The 
resulting gains or losses are reflected in income and are generally offset by 
losses or gains on the exposures being hedged.

     The Company's foreign subsidiaries purchase U.S. dollar call options as a
hedge of anticipated intercompany purchases by these subsidiaries whose
functional currency is not the U.S. dollar.  These contracts give the Company
the right, but not the requirement, to purchase U.S. dollars in exchange for
foreign currencies, primarily European currencies and Japanese yen, at
predetermined exchange rates.  At December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, the Company
held $406 million, $461 million, and $431 million, respectively, of U.S. dollar
call option contracts.  The contracts outstanding at December 31, 1998, mature
in 1999.  Realized and unrealized gains and losses on contracts that qualify as
hedges of anticipated purchases by foreign subsidiaries are recognized in the
same period that the foreign currency exposure is recognized.  Contracts that do
not qualify for hedge accounting are marked to market each month, and the
resulting gains or losses are reflected in income.

     The Company purchases foreign currency put options as a hedge against the
effect of exchange rate fluctuations on income.  These contracts give the
Company the right, but not the requirement, to sell foreign currencies,
primarily European currencies and Japanese yen, in exchange for U.S. dollars at
predetermined exchange rates.  These contracts are marked to market each month.
The resulting gains or losses are reflected in income and are generally offset
by losses or gains on the exposures being hedged.  There were no such contracts
outstanding at December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996.

     Net unrealized losses on foreign currency forward exchange contracts are
included in other prepaid expenses and receivables, and net unrealized gains are
included in other accrued liabilities.  Gains and losses are classified as net
foreign exchange (gain) loss.  For U.S. dollar call options, net unrealized
gains and losses and unamortized premiums are included in other prepaid expenses
and receivables, and for foreign currency put options and U.S. dollar call
options that do not qualify for hedge accounting, gains and losses are included
as net foreign exchange (gain) loss.  For U.S. dollar call options that qualify
for hedge accounting treatment, gains and losses are included in cost of
products sold at the time the products are sold.

     In June 1998, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments
and Hedging Activities."  This statement requires the recognition of the fair
value of derivatives as either assets or liabilities.  The statement is
effective for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 1999.  Adoption of the
provisions of this statement will not have a material effect on the financial
statements of the Company.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


     The gross unrealized holding gains (losses) on current held-to-maturity
investment securities and those maturing after one year totaled $3.7 million and
$(9.6) million, respectively, at December 31, 1998; $4.1 million and $(10.2)
million, respectively, at December 31, 1997; and $4.2 million and $(11.0)
million, respectively, at December 31, 1996.  The gross unrealized holding gains
(losses) on available-for-sale marketable equity securities, classified as
deferred charges and other assets, totaled $61.7 million and $(6.7) million,
respectively, at December 31, 1998.  The gross unrealized holding gains on
available-for-sale marketable equity securities were $54.0 million and $51.0
million, respectively, at December 31, 1997 and 1996.

     The carrying values and fair values of certain of the Company's financial
instruments as of December 31 are shown in the table below.  The carrying values
of all other financial instruments approximate their estimated fair values.
Fair value is the quoted market price of the instrument held or the quoted
market price of a similar instrument.  The counterparties to financial
instruments consist of select major international financial institutions.  The
Company does not expect any losses from nonperformance by these counterparties.

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                                   (millions of dollars)
                                                          1998                     1997                     1996
                                                 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Carrying         Fair    Carrying         Fair    Carrying         Fair
                                                   Value         Value      Value         Value      Value         Value
                                                 ---------------------    ---------------------    ---------------------
<S>                                              <C>          <C>         <C>            <C>       <C>            <C>
Investment Securities:
    Current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    75.1    $    75.7      $ 29.0       $ 29.1      $ 12.9       $ 12.7
    Maturing after One Year. . . . . . . . .        783.8        777.3       631.0        624.8       665.6        659.0

Total Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . .     (1,340.8)    (1,400.9)     (940.6)      (946.0)     (935.2)      (917.0)

Foreign Currency Forward
  Exchange Contracts:
    (Payable) position . . . . . . . . . . .        (14.2)       (14.2)       (6.2)        (6.2)      (10.9)       (10.9)
    Receivable position. . . . . . . . . . .         21.7         21.7        24.1         24.1        18.6         18.6

Foreign Currency Option Contracts. . . . . .         14.4          3.6        14.8         15.3         2.8          1.6

</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 7 - Common Stock Split

On February 13, 1998, the Board of Directors approved a two-for-one stock 
split.  Shareholders of record on May 1, 1998, were issued an additional 
share of the Company's common stock on May 29, 1998, for each share owned on 
the record date.  All common shares and per share data in the consolidated 
financial statements and notes have been adjusted to reflect the stock split.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 8 - Incentive Stock Program

The 1996 Incentive Stock Program authorizes the granting of stock options, 
replacement stock options, stock appreciation rights, limited stock 
appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, performance units, and foreign 
qualified benefits.  Stock options, replacement stock options, limited stock 
appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, and foreign qualified benefits 
have been granted and are currently outstanding under this program and prior 
programs. The purchase price of shares under option must be at least equal to 
the fair market value of the common stock on the date of grant and the 
maximum term of an option is ten years.  Options granted in 1998, 1997, and 
1996 vest equally over three years except for replacement options which 
generally vest in six months.

     Limited stock appreciation rights have been granted to certain holders of
stock options and can be exercised, by surrendering the related stock options,
only upon a change in control of the Company.  At December 31, 1998, 7,319,089
options, with a weighted average exercise price of $25.10 per share, were
subject to limited stock appreciation rights.  Upon a change in control of the
Company, all outstanding stock options become fully exercisable, and all terms
and conditions of all restricted stock awards are deemed satisfied.

     At January 1, 1999, 23,244,070 shares were reserved for future grants under
the 1996 Program.  Subsequent to year end, the Board of Directors granted
approximately 13.3 million stock options from this reserve.  Data with respect
to stock options under the 1996 Program and prior programs are as follows:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                               OPTIONS OUTSTANDING           EXERCISABLE OPTIONS
                               -------------------           -------------------
                                          Weighted                      Weighted
                                           Average                       Average
                                          Exercise                      Exercise
                          Shares            Price        Shares           Price
                        -----------       --------    -----------       --------
<S>                     <C>               <C>          <C>              <C>
January 1, 1996          59,001,574         $13.91
Granted                  12,243,128          21.98
Exercised               (10,207,402)         10.19
Lapsed                     (563,110)         20.20
                        -----------         ------
December 31, 1996        60,474,190          16.11     39,914,828         $13.75
                                                      -----------         ------
                                                      -----------         ------
Granted                  14,203,498          29.72
Exercised               (15,268,426)         11.37
Lapsed                     (753,016)         24.18
                        -----------         ------
December 31, 1997        58,656,246          20.54     33,544,332          16.56
                                                      -----------         ------
                                                      -----------         ------
Granted                  17,894,254          37.92
Exercised               (13,641,871)         18.30
Lapsed                     (949,032)         31.21
                        -----------         ------
December 31, 1998        61,959,597         $25.89     35,018,732         $20.23
                        -----------         ------    -----------         ------
                        -----------         ------    -----------         ------
</TABLE>



<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                  Options Outstanding       Exercisable Options
                                  at December 31, 1998      at December 31, 1998
                                ------------------------    --------------------
                                  Weighted      Weighted                Weighted
                                  Average       Average                 Average
  Range of                       Remaining      Exercise                Exercise
  Exercise Prices     Shares    Life (Years)     Price        Shares     Price
- -----------------   ----------  ------------    --------    ----------  --------
<S>                 <C>         <C>             <C>         <C>          <C>
    $  6 to $21     23,408,676       4.2         $16.47     23,376,410   $16.47
      22 to  36     22,423,247       7.8          26.88     10,647,080    26.82
      37 to  50     16,127,674       9.2          38.17        995,242    38.04
                    ----------       ---         ------     ----------   ------

    $  6 to $50     61,959,597       6.8         $25.89     35,018,732   $20.23
                    ----------       ---         ------     ----------   ------
                    ----------       ---         ------     ----------   ------
</TABLE>

The Company measures compensation cost using the intrinsic value-based method 
of accounting.  Had compensation cost been determined using the fair market 
value-based accounting method for options granted since 1995, pro forma net 
income for 1998, 1997, and 1996 would have been $2.243 billion, $2.030 
billion and $1.845 billion, respectively, and pro forma basic earnings per 
common share for 1998, 1997 and 1996 would have been $1.47, $1.32 and $1.18, 
respectively. The weighted average fair value of an option granted in 1998, 
1997 and 1996, was $10.31, $8.21 and $5.82, respectively.  For purposes of 
fair market value disclosures, the fair market value of an option grant was 
estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following 
assumptions:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                1998         1997        1996
                                                ----         ----        ----
<S>                                             <C>          <C>         <C>
Risk-Free Interest Rate. . . . . . . . .        5.50%        6.00%       5.25%
Average Life of Options (years). . . . .         5.6          5.2         5.2
Volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23.0%        25.0%       25.0%
Dividend Yield . . . . . . . . . . . . .         1.6%         1.9%        1.9%

</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 9 - Debt and Lines of Credit
(dollars in thousands)

The following is a summary of long-term debt at December 31:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                             1998          1997        1996
                                          ----------     --------    --------
<S>                                       <C>            <C>         <C>
6.5% debentures, due 2001. . . . . . . .  $  250,000     $250,000    $250,000
5.6% debentures, due 2003. . . . . . . .     200,000      200,000     200,000
6.8% debentures, due 2005. . . . . . . .     150,000      150,000     150,000
6.4% debentures, due 2006. . . . . . . .     250,000      250,000     250,000
6.0% debentures, due 2008. . . . . . . .     200,000            -           -
5.4% debentures, due 2008. . . . . . . .     200,000            -           -
Other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      89,694       87,983      82,898
                                          ----------     --------    --------
Total, net of current maturities . . . .  $1,339,694     $937,983    $932,898
                                          ----------     --------    --------
                                          ----------     --------    --------
</TABLE>

Payments required on long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 1998 are $1,125
in 1999, $9,926 in 2000, $250,926 in 2001, $1,351 in 2002, and $201,280 in 2003.

     At December 31, 1998, the Company had $2,505,000 of unused domestic lines
of credit which support domestic commercial paper borrowing arrangements.
Related compensating balances, which are subject to withdrawal by the Company at
its option, and commitment fees are not material.  The Company's weighted
average interest rate on short-term borrowings was 5.5%, 6.0%, and 5.8% at
December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, respectively.

     The Company may issue up to $750,000 of senior debt securities in the
future under a registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission in 1998.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 10 - Investment in Equity Method Investments
(dollars in millions)

The Company's 50 percent owned joint venture, TAP Holdings Inc. (TAP), is
accounted for under the equity method of accounting.  The Company's share of
TAP's income was $266, $189, and $130 in 1998, 1997, and 1996, respectively.
The investment in TAP is included in deferred charges and other assets and was
$368, $311, and $185 at December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, respectively.
Dividends received from TAP were $209, $63, and $20 in 1998, 1997, and 1996,
respectively.  Summarized financial information for TAP is as follows:


<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                   Year Ended December 31
                                             ---------------------------------
                                              1998         1997        1996
                                            --------     --------    --------
<S>                                         <C>          <C>         <C>
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $2,062.7     $1,565.8    $1,128.6
Cost of products sold. . . . . . . . . .       426.5        321.1       270.6
Income before income taxes . . . . . . .       836.3        612.4       426.7
Net income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       532.7        379.0       259.4

</TABLE>

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                         December 31
                                             ---------------------------------
                                              1998         1997        1996
                                            --------     --------    --------
<S>                                         <C>          <C>         <C>
Current assets . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $1,088.8      $ 727.5     $ 439.0
Total assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1,251.1        847.9       577.1
Current liabilities. . . . . . . . . . .       514.2        223.2       198.5

</TABLE>

Undistributed earnings of investments accounted for under the equity method
amounted to $345 as of December 31, 1998.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 11 - Quarterly Results (Unaudited)
(dollars in millions except per share data)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                              1998         1997        1996
                                            --------     --------    --------
<S>                                         <C>          <C>         <C>
FIRST QUARTER
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $3,044.9     $2,999.8    $2,672.2
Gross Profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1,764.9      1,672.5     1,516.0
Net Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       589.6        534.8       480.1
Basic Earnings Per Common Share. . . . .         .39          .34         .30
Diluted Earnings Per Common Share. . . .         .38          .34         .30

SECOND QUARTER
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $3,066.8     $2,900.4    $2,699.2
Gross Profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1,769.0      1,683.4     1,555.3
Net Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       585.6        521.5       470.4
Basic Earnings Per Common Share. . . . .         .38          .34         .30
Diluted Earnings Per Common Share. . . .         .38          .33         .30

THIRD QUARTER
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $3,035.8     $2,865.2    $2,646.2
Gross Profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1,660.8      1,623.3     1,468.9
Net Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       531.7        471.5       420.9
Basic Earnings Per Common Share. . . . .         .35          .31         .27
Diluted Earnings Per Common Share. . . .         .34          .30         .26

FOURTH QUARTER
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $3,330.3     $3,118.1    $2,995.9
Gross Profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1,888.7      1,858.6     1,741.3
Net Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       626.3        566.7       510.6
Basic Earnings Per Common Share. . . . .         .41          .37         .33
Diluted Earnings Per Common Share. . . .         .41          .37         .33

</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 12 - Business Acquisitions

In 1998, the Company acquired the common stock of International Murex 
Technologies Corporation, a manufacturer of medical diagnostic products, for 
approximately $234 million in cash.  A substantial portion of the purchase 
price was allocated to goodwill, which will be amortized on a straight-line 
basis over 20 years.  In 1997, the Company acquired certain parenteral 
products businesses of Sanofi Pharmaceuticals, Inc., for approximately $200 
million in cash.  A substantial portion of the purchase price was allocated 
to goodwill, which will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 15 years.  
In 1996, the Company acquired all of the outstanding shares of MediSense, 
Inc., a manufacturer of blood glucose self-testing products, for 
approximately $867 million in cash. Goodwill of approximately $219 million 
will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 32 years and other intangible 
assets of $635 million, including trade names, patient base and acquired 
technology, will be amortized on a straight-line basis over approximately 30 
years.  Purchased in-process research and development of $37 million was 
charged against earnings.  Had these acquisitions taken place on January 1 of 
the previous years, consolidated sales and income would not have been 
significantly different from reported amounts.

     The Company currently owns 76 percent of the capital stock of a Japanese 
subsidiary.  In 1998, the Japanese subsidiary converted the common stock of 
the minority interest shareholder into non-voting, non-participating 
cumulative preferred stock.  Pursuant to an agreement with the minority 
interest shareholder, the Company will purchase this preferred stock over an 
eight-year period beginning in 1999 for approximately $115 million.  In 1998 
and 1997, the Company purchased six percent of the subsidiary's common stock 
for approximately $30 million.  Goodwill of $110 million resulting from these 
transactions will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 40 years.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 13 - Segment and Geographic Area Information
(dollars in millions)

REVENUE SEGMENTS - The Company's principal business is the discovery,
development, manufacture and sale of a broad line of health care products and
services.  The Company's products are generally sold directly to retailers,
wholesalers, hospitals, health care facilities, laboratories, physicians'
offices and government agencies throughout the world.  The Company's products
are sold through six revenue segments as follows:

     PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS - U.S. sales of a broad line of pharmaceuticals.

     DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS - Worldwide sales of diagnostic systems for blood
banks, hospitals, consumers, commercial laboratories and alternate-care testing
sites.

     HOSPITAL PRODUCTS - U.S. sales of intravenous and irrigation fluids and
related administration equipment, drugs and drug delivery systems, anesthetics,
critical care products and other medical specialty products for hospitals and
alternate-care sites.

     ROSS PRODUCTS - U.S. sales of a broad line of adult and pediatric
nutritional products, pediatric pharmaceuticals and consumer products.

     INTERNATIONAL - Non-U.S. sales of all the Company's pharmaceutical,
hospital and nutritional products.  Products sold by International are
manufactured by domestic segments and by international manufacturing locations.

     CHEMICAL & AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS - Worldwide sales of chemicals and
agricultural products for crop protection, forestry and animal health and a
supplier of bulk drugs for the Pharmaceutical Products, Hospital Products, and
International segments.

     The Company's underlying accounting records are maintained on a legal 
entity basis for government and public reporting requirements.  Segment 
disclosures are on a performance basis consistent with internal management 
reporting.  Intersegment transfers of inventory are recorded at standard cost 
and are not a measure of segment operating earnings.  The cost of some 
corporate functions and the cost of certain employee benefits are sold to 
segments at predetermined rates which approximate cost.  Remaining costs, if 
any, are not allocated to revenue segments.  The following segment 
information has been prepared in accordance with the internal accounting 
policies of the Company, as described above, and may not be presented in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)

Note 13 - Segment and Geographic Area Information
(dollars in millions)
(continued)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                    Net Sales to                   Operating                    Depreciation
                                 External Customers                 Earnings                  and Amortization
                            ---------------------------    --------------------------    --------------------------
                              1998      1997      1996      1998      1997      1996       1998      1997      1996
                             ------    ------    ------    ------    ------    ------    ------    ------    ------
<S>                         <C>       <C>       <C>        <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>
Pharmaceutical . . . . .    $ 2,601   $ 2,475   $ 2,058    $1,402    $1,242    $  970      $ 40      $ 37      $ 31
Diagnostics (a)(b) . . .      2,790     2,613     2,571       448       433       493       245       234       203
Hospital (c) . . . . . .      1,890     1,689     1,476       369       277       230       119       109       101
Ross . . . . . . . . . .      1,820     1,850     1,898       540       528       597        72        68        64
International (a). . . .      3,001     2,912     2,736       605       637       596        98        97        91
Chemical & Agricultural.        352       332       278       117       111        72        66        63        57
                            -------   -------   -------    ------    ------    ------      ----      ----      ----
Total Segments . . . . .     12,454    11,871    11,017    $3,481    $3,228    $2,958      $640      $608      $547
                                                           ------    ------    ------      ----      ----      ----
                                                           ------    ------    ------      ----      ----      ----
Other. . . . . . . . . .         24        12       (4)
Net Sales. . . . . . . .    $12,478   $11,883   $11,013
                            -------   -------   -------
                            -------   -------   -------

<CAPTION>

                                   Additions to
                                 Long-Term Assets                 Total Assets
                             --------------------------   ---------------------------
                              1998      1997      1996      1998      1997       1996
                             ------    ------    ------    ------    ------    ------
<S>                          <C>       <C>       <C>      <C>        <C>       <C>
Pharmaceutical . . . . .     $   54    $   53    $   49   $ 1,315    $1,362    $1,237
Diagnostics (a)(b) . . .        541       391     1,049     3,480     3,006     3,040
Hospital (c) . . . . . .        157       295       172     1,563     1,522     1,262
Ross . . . . . . . . . .         65        85       102       919       935       954
International (a). . . .        309       150       147     2,504     2,140     2,093
Chemical & Agricultural.         60        83        94       368       379       343
                             ------    ------    ------   -------    ------    ------
Total Segments . . . . .     $1,186    $1,057    $1,613   $10,149    $9,344    $8,929
                             ------    ------    ------   -------    ------    ------
                             ------    ------    ------   -------    ------    ------
Other. . . . . . . . . .
Net Sales. . . . . . . .

</TABLE>

(a)  Net sales and operating earnings were unfavorably affected by the
     relatively stronger U.S. dollar in 1998, 1997 and 1996.
(b)  In 1998 and 1996 the Company acquired the common stock of International
     Murex Technologies Corporation and MediSense, Inc., respectively.
(c)  In 1997, the Company acquired certain parenteral products businesses of
     Sanofi Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                               1998         1997        1996
                                               -----        -----       -----
<S>                                          <C>          <C>         <C>
Total Segment Operating Earnings . . . .      $3,481       $3,228      $2,958
Corporate and service functions. . . . .         145          153         118
Benefit plans costs. . . . . . . . . . .          94          113          92
Net interest expense . . . . . . . . . .         104           87          51
Income from TAP Holdings Inc . . . . . .        (266)        (189)       (130)
Net foreign exchange (gain) loss . . . .          31          (9)          22
Other expenses, net. . . . . . . . . . .         132          123         135
                                             -------      -------     -------
Consolidated Earnings Before Taxes . . .      $3,241       $2,950      $2,670
                                             -------      -------     -------
                                             -------      -------     -------

Total Segment Assets . . . . . . . . . .     $10,149       $9,344      $8,929
Cash and investments . . . . . . . . . .       1,167          890         789
Investment in TAP Holdings Inc.. . . . .         368          311         185
Prepaid income taxes . . . . . . . . . .         847          801         708
All other, net . . . . . . . . . . . . .         685          715         515
                                             -------      -------     -------
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $13,216      $12,061     $11,126
                                             -------      -------     -------
                                             -------      -------     -------
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 13 - Segment and Geographic Area Information
(dollars in millions)
(continued)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                     Net Sales to
                                  External Customers             Long-Term Assets
                            ---------------------------   ---------------------------
                              1998      1997      1996      1998      1997      1996
                              ----      ----      ----      ----      ----      ----
<S>                         <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>
United States. . . . . .    $ 7,919   $ 7,472   $ 6,786   $ 6,424   $ 5,946   $ 5,583
Japan. . . . . . . . . .        528       586       603       133       121       128
Germany. . . . . . . . .        446       438       428       186       167       171
Canada . . . . . . . . .        345       329       315        64        44        46
Italy. . . . . . . . . .        328       305       316       106        91        92
All Other Countries. . .      2,912     2,753     2,565       750       654       625
                            -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   -------
Consolidated . . . . . .    $12,478   $11,883   $11,013   $ 7,663   $ 7,023   $ 6,645
                            -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   -------
                            -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   -------
</TABLE>


The classes of products which contributed at least 10 percent to consolidated
net sales in at least one of the last three years were:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                               1998      1997      1996
                               ----      ----      ----
<S>                          <C>       <C>       <C>
Anti-Infectives. . . . .     $1,415    $1,510    $1,407
Adult Nutritionals . . .      1,257     1,240     1,226
Infant Formula . . . . .      1,132     1,166     1,153

</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)


Note 14 - Litigation and Environmental Matters

The Company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings including 
numerous antitrust suits and investigations in connection with the pricing of 
prescription pharmaceuticals.  These suits and investigations allege that 
various pharmaceutical manufacturers have conspired to fix prices for 
prescription pharmaceuticals and/or to discriminate in pricing to retail 
pharmacies by providing discounts to mail-order pharmacies, institutional 
pharmacies and HMOs in violation of state and federal antitrust laws.  The 
suits have been brought on behalf of individuals and retail pharmacies and 
name both the Company and certain other pharmaceutical manufacturers and 
pharmaceutical wholesalers and at least one mail-order pharmacy company as 
defendants.  The cases seek treble damages, civil penalties, injunctive and 
other relief.  During 1998, settlements were reached in the federal class 
action lawsuit, whereby the Company paid $57 million, and thirteen other 
separate actions.  The Company has filed or intends to file a response to 
each of the remaining complaints denying all substantive allegations.

     In addition, the Company has been identified as a potentially responsible
party for investigation and cleanup costs at a number of locations in the United
States and Puerto Rico under federal and state remediation laws and is
investigating potential contamination at a number of Company-owned locations.

     The Company expects that within the next year, legal proceedings will occur
which may result in a change in the estimated reserves recorded by the Company.
While it is not feasible to predict the outcome of such pending claims,
proceedings, investigations and remediation activities with certainty,
management is of the opinion that their ultimate disposition should not have a
material adverse effect on the Company's financial position, cash flows, or
results of operations.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                       REPORT OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS


To the Shareholders of Abbott Laboratories:

     We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Abbott
Laboratories (an Illinois corporation) and Subsidiaries as of December 31, 1998,
1997, and 1996, and the related consolidated statements of earnings,
shareholders' investment, and cash flows for the years then ended.  These
financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management.  Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on
our audits.

     We conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted auditing
standards.  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.  An audit also includes
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.

     In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of Abbott Laboratories and
Subsidiaries as of December 31, 1998, 1997, and 1996, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles.

Chicago, Illinois                                      Arthur Andersen LLP
January 14, 1999



                          AUDIT COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN'S REPORT

The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed of six non-employee
directors.  The Audit Committee oversees the Company's financial reporting
process on behalf of the Board of Directors.  The Committee held two meetings
during 1998.  In fulfilling its responsibility, the Committee recommended to the
Board of Directors, subject to shareholder approval, the selection of the
Company's independent public accountants.  The Audit Committee discussed with
the internal auditors and the independent public accountants the overall scope
and specific plans for their respective audits.  The Committee also discussed
the Company's consolidated financial statements and the adequacy of the
Company's internal controls.  During the Audit Committee meetings, the Committee
met with the internal auditors and independent public accountants, without
management present, to discuss the results of their audits, their evaluations of
the Company's internal controls, and the overall quality of the Company's
financial reporting.  The meetings also were designed to facilitate any private
communication with the Committee desired by the internal auditors or independent
public accountants.


W. Ann Reynolds, Ph.D.
Chairman, Audit Committee


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                      MANAGEMENT REPORT ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


Management has prepared, and is responsible for, the Company's consolidated 
financial statements and related notes.  They have been prepared in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and necessarily 
include amounts based on judgments and estimates by management.  All 
financial information in this annual report is consistent with the 
consolidated financial statements.

     The Company maintains internal accounting control systems and related
policies and procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance that assets are
safeguarded, that transactions are executed in accordance with management's
authorization and properly recorded, and that accounting records may be relied
upon for the preparation of consolidated financial statements and other
financial information.  The design, monitoring, and revision of internal
accounting control systems involve, among other things, management's judgment
with respect to the relative cost and expected benefits of specific control
measures.  The Company also maintains an internal auditing function which
evaluates and formally reports on the adequacy and effectiveness of internal
accounting controls, policies, and procedures.

     The Company's consolidated financial statements have been audited by
independent public accountants who have expressed their opinion with respect to
the fairness of these statements.




Miles D. White
Chief Executive Officer



Gary P. Coughlan
Senior Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer



Theodore A. Olson
Vice President and Controller


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                      FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
                                     (Unaudited)


INTEREST RATE SENSITIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS

The Company does not currently use derivative financial instruments, such as
interest rate swaps, to manage its exposure to changes in interest rates for its
debt instruments and investment securities.  As of December 31, 1998 and 1997,
the Company had $1.7 billion of domestic commercial paper outstanding with an
average interest rate of 5.4% and 6.0%, respectively, and with an average
remaining life of 9 days and 11 days, respectively.  The fair market value of
long-term debt at December 31, 1998 and 1997 amounted to $1.4 billion and $946
million, respectively, and consisted primarily of fixed rate (average of 6.1%
and 6.3%, respectively) debt with maturities through 2023.  As of December 31,
1998 and 1997, the fair market value of current and long-term investment
securities maturing through 2023 amounted to $853 million and $654 million,
respectively.  Approximately 19 percent and 33 percent of these investments as
of December 31, 1998 and 1997, respectively, have fixed interest rates (average
of 7.1% and 7.5%, respectively), while the remaining investments have variable
rates.  A hypothetical 100-basis point change in the interest rates would not
have a material effect on cash flows, income or market values.

MARKET PRICE SENSITIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS

The Company maintains a portfolio of available-for-sale marketable equity
securities from strategic technology acquisitions which are included in deferred
charges and other assets.  The market value of these investments was
approximately $98 million and $83 million, respectively, as of December 31, 1998
and 1997.  A hypothetical 20 percent decrease in the share prices of these
investments would decrease the fair value by approximately $20 million.

FOREIGN CURRENCY SENSITIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS --

PURCHASED U.S. DOLLAR CALL OPTIONS

The Company's foreign subsidiaries purchase U.S. dollar call options as a hedge
of anticipated intercompany purchases by these foreign subsidiaries whose
functional currency, primarily European currencies and Japanese yen, is not the
U.S. dollar.  At December 31, 1998 and 1997, the Company held $406 million and
$461 million, respectively, of these contracts.  Unamortized premiums for these
contracts amounted to $14 million as of December 31, 1998, which represents the
maximum potential loss exposure.

FOREIGN CURRENCY FORWARD EXCHANGE CONTRACTS

The Company enters into foreign currency forward exchange contracts to manage
its exposure to foreign currency denominated intercompany loans and trade
payables and third-party trade payables and receivables.  The contracts are
marked to market and resulting gains or losses are reflected in income and are
generally offset by losses or gains on the foreign currency exposure being
hedged.  At December 31, 1998 and 1997, the Company held $1.6 billion and $1.3
billion, respectively, of such contracts which all mature in the next calendar
year.  The following table reflects the contracts outstanding at December 31,
1998 and 1997:


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT (CONTINUED)
                                     (Unaudited)


(dollars in millions)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                               1998                          1997
                                                                   ----------------------------  ----------------------------
                                                                              Average  Fair and             Average  Fair and
                                                                   Contract  Exchange  Carrying  Contract  Exchange  Carrying
                                                                    Amount     Rate      Value    Amount      Rate     Value
                                                                    ------     ----      -----    ------      ----     -----
<S>                                                                <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>
RECEIVE U.S. DOLLARS IN EXCHANGE FOR THE FOLLOWING CURRENCIES:
German Deutsche Mark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $  299      1.67     $ 1.9    $  304      1.75     $ 1.9
Spanish Peseta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        172     140.6       4.3       151     146.3       3.0
Japanese Yen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        137     120.0       3.2       122     122.8       3.7
Dutch Guilder. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        133      1.88       2.1       106      1.98       0.5
British Pound. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        160       0.6       0.3        70       0.6       2.1
Italian Lira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         86     1,654       1.1        59     1,713       0.5
French Franc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         39       5.6       0.6        33       5.8       0.5
Canadian Dollar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         38      1.54     (0.3)        30      1.41       0.1
Australian Dollar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         36      1.60       0.0        24      1.44       0.4
Brazilian Real . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25      1.30     (0.5)        22      1.04     (0.2)
Taiwan Dollar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30      34.0     (0.6)        18      30.4       1.0
Hong Kong Dollar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          3      7.88       0.0        13      7.73     (0.1)
Irish Punt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33      0.67     (0.3)        12      0.67     (0.1)
All other currencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        148       N/A     (1.8)       128       N/A       3.9
                                                                      -----               -----     -----               -----
                                                                      1,339                10.0     1,092                17.2

RECEIVE DUTCH GUILDERS IN EXCHANGE FOR THE FOLLOWING CURRENCIES: 
British Pound. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         92      0.32     (1.4)        74      0.31     (1.2)
French Franc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         28      2.98       0.0        32      2.97       0.0
Swiss Franc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15      0.72     (0.2)        24      0.72       0.0
Portuguese Escudo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32      90.9       0.0        17      91.2       0.0
Irish Punt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19      0.36       0.0        17      0.34       0.0
Japanese Yen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15      62.5       0.3        14      62.1       0.4
Taiwan Dollar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8      17.6     (0.3)         8      15.3       0.5
All other currencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15       N/A     (0.3)        29       N/A       0.3
                                                                      -----               -----     -----               -----
                                                                        224               (1.9)       215                 0.0
All other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8       N/A     (0.6)         5       N/A       0.7
                                                                      -----               -----     -----               -----
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     $1,571               $ 7.5    $1,312               $17.9
                                                                      -----               -----     -----               -----
                                                                      -----               -----     -----               -----
</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                                   FINANCIAL REVIEW


RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

SALES
The following table details the components of sales growth by segment for the
last three years:

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                       Components of Change %
                                                 Total %         -----------------------------------
Total Net Sales                                  Change          Price         Volume       Exchange
                                                 ------          -----         ------       --------
<S>                                              <C>             <C>           <C>          <C>
     1998 vs. 1997                                  5.0            0.6            7.2           (2.8)
     1997 vs. 1996                                  7.9            0.5           10.4           (3.0)
     1996 vs. 1995                                 10.0            0.1           11.5           (1.6)

Total Domestic
     1998 vs. 1997                                  6.0            1.0            5.0              -
     1997 vs. 1996                                 10.0            0.8            9.2              -
     1996 vs. 1995                                 10.8            0.1           10.7              -

Total International
     1998 vs. 1997                                  3.4           (0.1)          10.7           (7.2)
     1997 vs. 1996                                  4.8              -           12.2           (7.4)
     1996 vs. 1995                                  8.8            0.2           12.4           (3.8)

Pharmaceutical Products Segment
     1998 vs. 1997                                  5.1            3.8            1.3              -
     1997 vs. 1996                                 20.3            3.4           16.9              -
     1996 vs. 1995                                 27.3            4.9           22.4              -

Diagnostic Products Segment
     1998 vs. 1997                                  6.8           (2.1)          12.9           (4.0)
     1997 vs. 1996                                  1.6           (0.6)           7.7           (5.5)
     1996 vs. 1995                                  7.1           (1.4)          10.8           (2.3)

Hospital Products Segment
     1998 vs. 1997                                 11.9           (1.5)          13.4              -
     1997 vs. 1996                                 14.4           (1.8)          16.2              -
     1996 vs. 1995                                  9.1           (2.1)          11.2              -

Ross Products Segment
     1998 vs. 1997                                 (1.6)           0.9           (2.5)             -
     1997 vs. 1996                                 (2.5)          (0.4)          (2.1)             -
     1996 vs. 1995                                  0.7           (0.3)           1.0              -

International Segment
     1998 vs. 1997                                  3.1            1.4            9.5           (7.8)
     1997 vs. 1996                                  6.4            0.4           12.8           (6.8)
     1996 vs. 1995                                  8.9            0.6           12.3           (4.0)



<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                             FINANCIAL REVIEW (CONTINUED)



Chemical & Agricultural Products Segment
     1998 vs. 1997                                  6.0           (0.7)           6.7              -
     1997 vs. 1996                                 19.6            0.2           19.4              -
     1996 vs. 1995                                 12.9            1.1           11.8              -

</TABLE>


Sales of new products in 1998 are estimated to be $885 million, led by the
Diagnostics, International and Hospital products segments.  Increases, as
disclosed in Note 13, in anti-infectives and infant formula sales in 1996 and
1997 and increases in adult nutritionals in 1996, 1997 and 1998 were primarily
due to unit increases.  Decreases in anti-infectives and infant formula sales in
1998 were due primarily to unit decreases.

     The Company holds patents on Hytrin in the United States and several major
markets throughout the world.  The Company is facing a number of patent
challenges from generic manufacturers in the United States, and the ultimate
outcome of this litigation cannot be predicted with certainty.  However, the
Company does not expect a generic form of Hytrin to become available before the
end of the second quarter of 1999.  The Company believes generic competition
would adversely impact sales of Hytrin.  In 1998, the Company recorded U.S.
sales of Hytrin of $542 million.

     On July 27, 1998, the Company announced that it was experiencing
manufacturing difficulties with the capsule formulation of its protease
inhibitor Norvir.  The manufacturing difficulties with Norvir will result in
shortages and interruption of the supply of capsules.  The Company is supplying
Norvir liquid formulation to provide continued Norvir therapy for patients.  In
1998, the Company recorded sales of Norvir of $250 million.  The Company is
unable to quantify the effect that the production problems will have on sales in
future periods.

OPERATING EARNINGS
Gross profit margins (sales less cost of products sold, including freight and
distribution expenses) were 56.8 percent of net sales in 1998, 57.5 percent in
1997, and 57.0 percent in 1996.  The decrease in the gross profit margin in 1998
was caused by unfavorable product mix, primarily slower sales of pharmaceutical
products, and the negative effect of a relatively stronger U.S. dollar. The
increases in the gross profit margins in 1997 and 1996 were due primarily to
favorable product mix, especially higher sales of pharmaceuticals, price and
productivity improvements, partially offset by higher project expenses for new
products, higher manufacturing capacity costs for anticipated unit growth, and
the effects of inflation and competitive pricing pressures in some product
lines.  Gross profit margins in 1997 and 1996 were also unfavorably affected by
the relatively stronger U.S. dollar.  In the U.S., states receive price rebates
from manufacturers of infant formula under the federally subsidized Special
Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).  There are
also similar rebate programs for pharmaceutical products.  These rebate programs
continue to have a negative effect on the gross profit margins of the Ross and
Pharmaceutical products segments.

     In late 1998, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) suspended its
approval of the release of production lots of the Company's pharmaceutical
product Abbokinase due to Current Good Manufacturing Practice concerns raised by
the FDA following inspections of the Company and its raw material supplier.  In
January 1999, after the Company revised the product's labeling to add additional
warnings and the FDA issued a health care provider information sheet, the FDA
released certain lots that were under its review.  The FDA subsequently
established new criteria for the release of additional lots.  The Company is
instituting changes to its procedures in response to the FDA.  The Company
cannot predict whether these changes will resolve FDA's concerns or the effect
of this matter on future sales of Abbokinase.  During 1998, Abbott sold
approximately $277 million of Abbokinase, primarily in the United States.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                             FINANCIAL REVIEW (CONTINUED)


     Research and development expense decreased to $1.2 billion in 1998 and 
represented 9.8 percent of net sales in 1998, compared to 11.0 percent of net 
sales in 1997, and 10.9 percent of net sales in 1996.  The decrease in 
research and development expenses in 1998 was due, in part, to higher charges 
in 1997 for the acquisition of certain technologies in conjunction with 
business acquisitions and strategic alliances.  Research and development 
expenditures continue to be concentrated on pharmaceutical and diagnostic 
products.

     Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 2.2 percent in 
1998, net of the favorable effect of the relatively stronger U.S. dollar of 
2.8 percent, compared to increases of 9.2 percent in 1997, and 10.3 percent 
in 1996. The net increases, exclusive of exchange impact, reflect inflation, 
additional selling and marketing support for new and existing products, and 
litigation charges.

INTEREST (INCOME) EXPENSE, NET
Net interest expense increased in 1998, 1997 and 1996 due primarily to a higher
level of borrowings as a result of business acquisitions.  As a result of the
suspension of the common share purchase program, it is expected that the level
of borrowings will decrease in 1999.

TAXES ON EARNINGS
The Company's effective income tax rates were 28.0 percent in 1998, 29.0 percent
in 1997 and 29.5 percent in 1996.   The tax rates for 1998 and 1997 were reduced
primarily due to the extension of the research and development tax credit
through June 30, 1999.  In addition, all three years' tax rates were unfavorably
impacted by the reduction in tax incentive grants for Puerto Rico operations.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                             FINANCIAL REVIEW (CONTINUED)


FINANCIAL CONDITION

CASH FLOW
The Company expects positive cash flow from operating activities to continue to
approximate or exceed the Company's capital expenditures and cash dividends.

DEBT AND CAPITAL
The Company has maintained its favorable bond ratings (AAA by Standard & Poor's
Corporation and Aa1 by Moody's Investors Service) and continues to have readily
available financial resources, including unused domestic lines of credit of $2.5
billion at December 31, 1998.  These lines of credit support domestic commercial
paper borrowing arrangements.

     The Company may issue up to $750 million of senior debt securities in the
future under a registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission in 1998.

     During the last three years, the Company purchased 90,897,000 of its common
shares at a cost of $2.7 billion.  In December 1998, the Company suspended
purchases of its common shares and currently has no plans to resume purchases in
1999.

FINANCIAL CONDITION
At December 31, 1998, 1997 and 1996 working capital was $591 million, $4 million
and $137 million, respectively.  The decrease in working capital in 1997 was
partially due to increased short-term commercial paper borrowings which funded
long-term asset acquisitions.

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES

Capital expenditures of $991 million in 1998, $1.0 billion in 1997 and
$949 million in 1996 were principally for upgrading and expanding manufacturing,
research and development and administrative support facilities in all segments
and for laboratory instruments and hospital equipment placed with customers.
This level of capital expenditures is expected to continue, with an increased
proportion dedicated to the Hospital, International and Diagnostic products
segments.

BUSINESS ACQUISITIONS

In 1998, the Company acquired the common stock of International Murex 
Technologies Corporation, a manufacturer of medical diagnostic products, for 
approximately $234 million in cash.  A substantial portion of the purchase 
price was allocated to goodwill, which will be amortized on a straight-line 
basis over 20 years.  In 1997, the Company acquired certain parenteral 
products businesses of Sanofi Pharmaceuticals, Inc., for approximately $200 
million in cash.  A substantial portion of the purchase price was allocated 
to goodwill, which will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 15 years.  
In 1996, the Company acquired all of the outstanding shares of MediSense, 
Inc., a manufacturer of blood glucose self-testing products, for 
approximately $867 million in cash. Goodwill of approximately $219 million 
will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 32 years and other intangible 
assets of $635 million, including trade names, patient base and acquired 
technology, will be amortized on a straight-line basis over approximately 30 
years.  Purchased in-process research and development of $37 million was 
charged against earnings.  Had these acquisitions taken place on January 1 of 
the previous years, consolidated sales and income would not have been 
significantly different from reported amounts.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                             FINANCIAL REVIEW (CONTINUED)


LEGISLATIVE ISSUES

The Company's primary markets are highly competitive and subject to 
substantial government regulation.  The Company expects debate to continue at 
both the federal and state level over the availability, method of delivery, 
and payment for health care products and services.  The Company believes that 
if legislation is enacted, it could have the effect of reducing prices, or 
reducing the rate of price increases for medical products and services.  
International operations are also subject to a significant degree of 
government regulation.  It is not possible to predict the extent to which the 
Company or the health care industry in general might be adversely affected by 
these factors in the future.  A more complete discussion of these factors is 
contained in Item 1, Business, in the Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is 
available upon request.

RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARD

In June 1998, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments
and Hedging Activities."  This statement requires the recognition of the fair
value of derivatives as either assets or liabilities.  The statement is
effective for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 1999.  Adoption of the
provisions of this statement will not have a material effect on the financial
statements of the Company.

YEAR 2000

The Year 2000 ("Y2K") issue results from the inability of some computer programs
to identify the year 2000 properly, potentially leading to errors or system
failure.

     The Company has organized its efforts to resolve the Y2K issue as follows:
internal information systems; landlord and embedded systems; electronic products
currently marketed or in the field; and suppliers providing products and
services to the Company.  Progress goals have been established in each area.

     Internal information systems were inventoried and assessed, and remediation
started in 1992.  Virtually all remediation has been completed.  Eighty-one
percent of testing has been completed and all testing is scheduled to be
completed by mid-1999.  Current progress is slightly better than plan.

     Landlord and embedded systems were inventoried and Y2K assessment completed
by May 1998.  The Company's goal is to resolve all critical systems by July
1999.  Current progress is better than plan.

     The Company has assessed the ability of its medical electronic and software
products to cope with the Y2K issue.  Except for certain products distributed by
Murex, customers may access the Company's assessment on the Company's Web site.
For the recently acquired Murex product line, a referral source for customers to
contact the manufacturer is provided on the Web site.  Most of the Company's
products are not affected by the Y2K issue.  For those products requiring
remediation, the Company's goal is to provide solutions by June 1999.  Current
progress is according to plan.

     Beginning in March 1998, key suppliers were requested to certify that 
they were Y2K compliant or, if not, to provide their plans to become 
compliant. Eighty-six percent of suppliers responded; 54 percent of those 
responding certified compliance currently and 46 percent forwarded action 
plans.  Follow-up with all key suppliers is being conducted according to plan.

<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                             FINANCIAL REVIEW (CONTINUED)


     Each of the above areas began developing business continuity plans during
1998, and will complete development of those plans by September 30, 1999.

     The most likely worst-case Y2K scenarios are subject to a wide range of
speculation.  However, the business continuity plans will assume Y2K failures
are primarily third party, are intermittent, are of relatively short duration,
or are localized at one site or region, primarily outside the United States.

     The Company's policy is to expense Y2K remediation costs as incurred.  Y2K
remediation costs from inception through the end of 1999 are expected to
approximate $100 million, of which approximately one-third is expected to be
spent in 1999.

EURO CONVERSION

On January 1, 1999, the European Economic and Monetary Union took effect and
introduced the euro as the official single currency of the eleven participating
member countries.  On that date the currency exchange rates of the participating
countries were fixed against the euro.  There will be a three-year transition to
the euro, and at the end of 2001, the legacy currencies will be eliminated.  In
1997, the Company organized an internal cross-functional task force to address
the euro issues and expects to be ready for the full conversion to the euro.
Costs required to prepare for the euro are not material to the Company's
financial position, results of operations or cash flows.  The impact, if any, of
the euro on the Company's competitive position is unknown.

PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 -- A CAUTION CONCERNING
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

Under the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995, the Company cautions investors that any forward-looking statements or
projections made by the Company, including those made in this document, are
subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ
materially from those projected.  Economic, competitive, governmental,
technological and other factors that may affect the Company's operations are
discussed in Exhibit 99.1 to the Annual Report on Form 10-K.


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                          SUMMARY OF SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA

                                Year Ended December 31

                     (dollars in millions except per share data)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                     1998         1997         1996        1995         1994
                                                   ---------    --------     --------    --------      -------
<S>                                               <C>         <C>          <C>         <C>          <C>
Summary of Operations:
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $ 12,477.8    11,883.5     11,013.5    10,012.2      9,156.0
Cost of products sold. . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  5,394.4     5,045.7      4,732.0     4,325.8      3,993.8
Research and development . . . . . . . . . . .    $  1,221.6     1,302.4      1,204.8     1,072.7        963.5
Selling, general and administrative. . . . . .    $  2,743.9     2,685.0      2,459.6     2,230.7      2,054.5
Operating earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  3,117.9     2,850.4      2,617.1     2,382.9      2,144.2
Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    159.8       134.6         95.4        69.5         49.7
Interest income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    (55.7)      (47.7)       (44.5)      (51.8)       (36.9)
Other (income) expense, net. . . . . . . . . .    $   (226.8)     (186.3)      (103.4)      (30.2)       (35.3)
Earnings before taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  3,240.6     2,949.9      2,669.6     2,395.3      2,166.7
Taxes on earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    907.4       855.5        787.5       706.6        650.0
Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  2,333.2     2,094.5      1,882.0     1,688.7      1,516.7
Basic earnings per common share. . . . . . . .    $     1.53        1.36         1.20        1.06          .93
Diluted earnings per common share. . . . . . .    $     1.51        1.34         1.19        1.05          .92

Financial Position:
Working capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    591.0         3.7        137.2       436.4        400.5
Investment securities maturing after one year.    $    783.8       631.0        665.6       422.5        316.2
Net property and equipment . . . . . . . . . .    $  4,738.8     4,569.7      4,461.5     4,249.5      3,920.9
Total assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $ 13,216.2    12,061.1     11,125.6     9,412.6      8,523.7
Long-term debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  1,339.7       938.0        932.9       435.2        287.1
Shareholders' investment.. . . . . . . . . . .    $  5,713.7     4,998.7      4,820.2     4,396.8      4,049.4
Return on shareholders' investment . . . . . .    %     43.6        42.7         40.8        40.0         39.3
Book value per share . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $     3.77        3.27         3.11        2.79         2.52

Other Statistics:
Gross profit margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . .    %     56.8        57.5         57.0        56.8         56.4
Research and development to net sales. . . . .    %      9.8        11.0         10.9        10.7         10.5
Net cash from operating activities . . . . . .    $  2,732.9     2,628.8      2,382.1     1,965.6      2,212.1
Capital expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    990.6     1,007.3        949.0       947.0        929.5
Cash dividends declared per common share . . .    $      .60         .54          .48         .42          .38
Common shares outstanding (in thousands) . . .     1,516,063   1,528,188    1,548,898   1,574,614    1,606,560
Number of common shareholders. . . . . . . . .       107,209     102,981       99,513      89,831       86,324
Number of employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . .        56,236      54,487       52,817      50,241       49,464
Sales per employee (in dollars). . . . . . . .    $  221,884     218,097      208,521     199,283      185,105
Market price per share-high. . . . . . . . . .    $  50 1/16      34 5/8     28 11/16      22 3/8           17
Market price per share-low . . . . . . . . . .    $   32 1/2      24 7/8      19 1/16     15 5/16     12 11/16
Market price per share-close . . . . . . . . .    $       49      32 3/4       25 3/8    20 13/16      16 5/16

</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                    SUMMARY OF SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA (CONTINUED)

                                Year Ended December 31

                     (dollars in millions except per share data)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                     1993         1992         1991        1990         1989
                                                   ---------     -------      -------     -------      -------
<S>                                               <C>         <C>          <C>         <C>          <C>
Summary of Operations:
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  8,407.8     7,851.9      6,876.6     6,158.7      5,379.8
Cost of products sold. . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  3,684.7     3,505.3      3,140.0     2,910.1      2,556.7
Research and development . . . . . . . . . . .    $    881.0       772.4        666.3       567.0        501.8
Selling, general and administrative. . . . . .    $  1,988.2     1,833.2      1,513.3     1,275.6      1,100.2
Operating earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  1,924.0     1,526.0      1,557.0     1,406.0      1,221.1
Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $     54.3        53.0         63.8        91.4         74.4
Interest income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    (37.8)      (42.3)       (45.1)      (51.6)       (73.8)
Other (income) expense, net. . . . . . . . . .    $    (35.7)       48.5         (5.9)       15.5         26.3
Earnings before taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  1,943.2     1,738.8      1,544.2     1,350.7      1,194.2
Taxes on earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    544.1       499.7        455.5       384.9        334.4
Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  1,399.1     1,239.1      1,088.7       965.8        859.8
Basic earnings per common share. . . . . . . .    $      .84         .73          .64         .56          .48
Diluted earnings per common share. . . . . . .    $      .84         .73          .63         .55          .47

Financial Position:
Working capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    490.6       449.2        661.7       460.0        719.2
Investment securities maturing after one year.    $    221.8       270.6        340.2       314.0        300.0
Net property and equipment . . . . . . . . . .    $  3,511.0     3,099.2      2,662.1     2,375.8      2,090.2
Total assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $  7,688.6     6,941.2      6,255.3     5,563.2      4,851.6
Long-term debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    306.8       110.0        125.1       134.8        146.7
Shareholders' investment . . . . . . . . . . .    $  3,674.9     3,347.6      3,203.0     2,833.6      2,726.4
Return on shareholders' investment . . . . . .    %     39.8        37.8         36.1        34.7         33.1
Book value per share . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $     2.24        2.00         1.88        1.65         1.54

Other Statistics:
Gross profit margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . .    %     56.2        55.4         54.3        52.7         52.5
Research and development to net sales. . . . .    %     10.5         9.8          9.7         9.2          9.3
Net cash from operating activities . . . . . .    $  1,846.9     1,388.8      1,453.2     1,200.9        959.9
Capital expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $    952.7     1,007.2        732.8       629.5        501.5
Cash dividends declared per common share . . .    $      .34         .30          .25         .21          .17
Common shares outstanding (in thousands) . . .     1,642,260   1,672,104    1,701,060   1,716,564    1,769,916
Number of common shareholders. . . . . . . . .        82,947      75,703       56,541      49,827       45,361
Number of employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . .        49,659      48,118       45,694      43,770       40,929
Sales per employee (in dollars). . . . . . . .    $  169,312     163,180      150,492     140,706      131,441
Market price per share-high. . . . . . . . . .    $  15 7/16     17 1/16       17 3/8     11 9/16      8 13/16
Market price per share-low . . . . . . . . . .    $  11 5/16     13 1/16      9 13/16     7 13/16        5 3/4
Market price per share-close . . . . . . . . .    $ 14 13/16     15 3/16      17 3/16      11 1/4        8 1/2

</TABLE>


<PAGE>

                         Abbott Laboratories and Subsidiaries

                    SUMMARY OF SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA (CONTINUED)

                                Year Ended December 31

                     (dollars in millions except per share data)

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                               1988
                                                            ----------
<S>                                                         <C>
Summary of Operations:
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  4,937.0
Cost of products sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  2,353.2
Research and development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    454.6
Selling, general and administrative. . . . . . . . . .      $  1,027.2
Operating earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  1,102.0
Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $     85.0
Interest income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    (69.4)
Other (income) expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $     30.9
Earnings before taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  1,055.5
Taxes on earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    303.5
Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    752.0
Basic earnings per common share. . . . . . . . . . . .      $      .42
Diluted earnings per common share. . . . . . . . . . .      $      .41

Financial Position:
Working capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    913.3
Investment securities maturing after one year. . . . .      $    285.7
Net property and equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  1,952.6
Total assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  4,825.1
Long-term debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    349.3
Shareholders' investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $  2,464.6
Return on shareholders' investment . . . . . . . . . .      %     33.0
Book value per share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $     1.37

Other Statistics:
Gross profit margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      %     52.3
Research and development to net sales. . . . . . . . .      %      9.2
Net cash from operating activities . . . . . . . . . .      $    965.4
Capital expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    521.2
Cash dividends declared per common share . . . . . . .      $      .15
Common shares outstanding (in thousands) . . . . . . .       1,798,768
Number of common shareholders. . . . . . . . . . . . .          46,324
Number of employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          38,751
Sales per employee (in dollars). . . . . . . . . . . .      $  127,403
Market price per share-high. . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $   6 9/16
Market price per share-low . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $    5 3/8
Market price per share-close . . . . . . . . . . . . .      $        6

</TABLE>


</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-21
<SEQUENCE>7
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 21
<TEXT>

<PAGE>

                                      EXHIBIT


                        SUBSIDIARIES OF ABBOTT LABORATORIES

     The following is a list of subsidiaries of the Company.  Abbott 
Laboratories is not a subsidiary of any other corporation.

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                  State of
Domestic Subsidiaries                             Incorporation 
- ---------------------                             -------------
<S>                                               <C>
Abbott Chemicals Plant, Inc.                      Puerto Rico

Abbott Health Products, Inc.                      Delaware

Abbott Home Infusion Services                     New York
  of New York, Inc.

Abbott International Ltd.                         Delaware

Abbott International Ltd. of Puerto Rico          Puerto Rico

Abbott Laboratories Inc.                          Delaware

Abbott Laboratories International Co.             Illinois

Abbott Laboratories Pacific Ltd.                  Illinois

Abbott Laboratories (Puerto Rico)
  Incorporated                                    Puerto Rico

Abbott Laboratories Residential
  Development Fund, Inc.                          Illinois

Abbott Laboratories Services Corp.                Illinois

Abbott Trading Company, Inc.                      Virgin Islands

Abbott Universal Ltd.                             Delaware

CMM Transportation, Inc.                          Delaware

Corporate Alliance, Inc.                          Delaware

Fuller Research Corporation                       Delaware

IMTC Technologies, Inc.                           Delaware

Laser Surgery Partnership                         Illinois
</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                                 -2-
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

<S>                                               <C>
Medlase Holding Corporation                       Delaware

Murex Diagnostics, Inc.                           Delaware

North Shore Properties, Inc.                      Delaware

Oximetrix de Puerto Rico, Inc.                    Delaware

Oximetrix, Inc.                                   Delaware

Solartek Products, Inc.                           Delaware

Sorenson Research Co., Inc.                       Utah

Swan-Myers, Incorporated                          Indiana

TAP Holdings Inc.                                 Delaware

TAP Pharmaceuticals Inc.                          Delaware

Tobal Products Incorporated                       Illinois
</TABLE>

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

                                                  Country
                                                  in Which
Foreign Subsidiaries                              Organized
- --------------------                              ---------
<S>                                               <C>
Abbott Laboratories Argentina, S.A.               Argentina

Abbott Australasia Pty. Limited                   Australia

Abbott Laboratories Executive Superannuation      Australia
  Pty. Limited

Abbott Laboratories Superannuation Pty. Limited   Australia

MediSense Australia Pty. Ltd.                     Australia

Abbott Gesellschaft m.b.H.                        Austria

Abbott Hospitals Limited                          Bahamas

Abbott Laboratories (Bangladesh) Ltd.             Bangladesh

Abbott, S.A.                                      Belgium
</TABLE>

<PAGE>
                                -3-

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

<S>                                              <C>
MediSense Belgium, BVBA                           Belgium

Abbott Ireland                                    Bermuda

Abbott Laboratorios do Brasil Ltda.               Brazil

Abbott Laboratories Limited                       Canada

MediSense Canada, Inc.                            Canada

Abbott Laboratories de Chile
  Limitada                                        Chile

Ningbo Asia-Pacific Biotechnology Ltd.            China, People's
                                                  Republic of

Shangai Abbott Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.           China, People's
                                                  Republic of

Abbott Laboratories de Colombia, S.A.             Colombia

Abbott Laboratories de Cost Rica Ltd.             Costa Rica

Abbott Laboratories s.r.o.                        Czech Republic 
                                                  
Abbott Laboratories A/S                           Denmark

Abbott Laboratorios del Ecuador, S.A.             Ecuador

Abbott, S.A. de C.V.                              El Salvador

Abbott Investments Limited                        England

Abbott Laboratories Limited                       England

Abbott Laboratories Trustee
  Company Limited                                 England

MediSense (U.K.) Ltd.                             England

Abbott Oy                                         Finland

Abbott France S.A.                                France

Alcyon Analyzer S. A.                             France

MediSense France SARL                             France

Abbott G.m.b.H.                                   Germany

MediSense (Deutschland) GmbH                      Germany
</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                                 - 4- 
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

<S>                                              <C>
Abbott Diagnostics G.m.b.H.                       Germany

Abbott Laboratories (Hellas) S.A.                 Greece

FAMAR Panos A. Marinopoulos S.A.                  Greece

FAMAR Anonymous Industrial Co. of                 Greece
 Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics

Abbott Grenada Limited                            Grenada

Abbott Laboratorios, S.A.                         Guatemala

Abbott Laboratories Limited                       Hong Kong

Abbott Laboratories (Hungary) Ltd.                Hungary

Abbott Laboratories (India) Limited               India

Abind Healthcare Private Limited                  India

P. T. Abbott Indonesia                            Indonesia

Abbott Laboratories, Ireland,
  Limited                                         Ireland

Abbott Ireland Ltd.                               Ireland

Abbott S.p.A.                                     Italy

Abbott West Indies Limited                        Jamaica

Consolidated Laboratories Limited                 Jamaica

Abbott Japan K.K.                                 Japan

Dainabot Co., Ltd.                                Japan

MediSense Japan Ltd.                              Japan

Abbott Korea Limited                              Korea

Abbott Middle East S.A.R.L.                       Lebanon

Abbott Laboratories (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd.          Malaysia
</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                                 - 5 -

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

<S>                                               <C>
Abbott Laboratories de Mexico, S.A. de C.V.       Mexico

Abbott Laboratories (Mozambique)
  Limitada                                        Mozambique

Abbott B.V.                                       The Netherlands

Abbott Finance B.V.                               The Netherlands

Abbott Holdings B.V.                              The Netherlands

Abbott Laboratories B.V.                          The Netherlands
 
Edisco B.V.                                       The Netherlands
                                                  
MediSense Europe B.V.                             The Netherlands

MediSense Netherlands, B.V.                       The Netherlands

Abbott Laboratories (N.Z.) Limited                New Zealand

Abbott Laboratories Nigeria Limited               Nigeria

Abbott Laboratories (Pakistan) Limited            Pakistan

Abbott Laboratories, C.A.                         Panama

Abbott Overseas, S.A.                             Panama

Abbott Laboratorios S.A.                          Peru

Abbott Laboratories                               Philippines

l02 E. de los Santos Realty Co., Inc.             Philippines

Union-Madison Realty Company, Inc.                Philippines

Abbott Laboratories Sp. z.o.o.                    Poland

Abbott Laboratorios, Limitada                     Portugal

Abbott Laboratories (Singapore)
  Private Limited                                 Singapore

Abbott Laboratories South Africa
  (Pty.) Limited                                  South Africa
</TABLE>

<PAGE>

                                - 6 -

<TABLE>
<CAPTION>

<S>                                              <C>
Abbott Laboratories, S.A.                         Spain

Abbott Cientifica, S.A.                           Spain

Abbott Scandinavia A.B.                           Sweden

MediSense Sverige AB                              Sweden

Abbott A.G.                                       Switzerland

Abbott Laboratories S.A.                          Switzerland

Abbott Finance Company S.A.                       Switzerland

MediSense AG                                      Switzerland

Abbott Laboratories Taiwan Limited                Taiwan

Abbott Laboratories Limited                       Thailand

Abbott Laboratuarlari Ithalat Ihracat
  Ve Tecaret Anonim Sirketi                       Turkey

Abbott Laboratories Uruguay Limitada              Uruguay

Abbott Laboratories, C.A.                         Venezuela

Medicamentos M & R, S.A.                          Venezuela

Date:  as of January 31, 1999
</TABLE>

</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-23
<SEQUENCE>8
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 23
<TEXT>

<PAGE>


                                                                     Exhibit 23



                   CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS



     As independent public accountants, we hereby consent to the 
incorporation by reference of the following into Abbott's previously filed 
S-8 Registration Statements 33-4368 for the Abbott Laboratories 1986 
Incentive Stock Program, 33-39798 for the Abbott Laboratories 1991 Incentive 
Stock Program, 333-09071, 333-43381 and 333-69547 for the Abbott Laboratories 
1996 Incentive Stock Program, 333-13091 for the Abbott Laboratories Ashland 
Union 401(k) Plan and Trust, and 33-26685, 33-51585, 33-56897, 33-65127, 
333-19511, 333-43383, and 333-69579 for the Abbott Laboratories Stock 
Retirement Plan and Trust and into Abbott's previously filed S-3 Registration 
Statements 33-50253, 333-06155, 333-63481, and 333-65601:

     1.  Our supplemental report dated January 14, 1999 included in this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 1998; and

     2.  Our report dated January 14, 1999 incorporated by reference in this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 1998.



                                     ARTHUR ANDERSEN LLP



Chicago, Illinois
March 9, 1999
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-27
<SEQUENCE>9
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 27
<TEXT>

<TABLE> <S> <C>

<PAGE>
<ARTICLE> 5
<LEGEND>
THIS SCHEDULE CONTAINS TWELVE MONTH YEAR-TO-DATE FINANCIAL INFORMATION EXTRACTED
FROM ABBOTT LABORATORIES' 1998 FORM 10-K AND IS QUALIFIED IN ITS ENTIRETY BY
REFERENCE TO SUCH FORM 10-K FILING.
</LEGEND>
<MULTIPLIER> 1,000
       
<S>                             <C>
<PERIOD-TYPE>                   YEAR
<FISCAL-YEAR-END>                          DEC-31-1998
<PERIOD-START>                             JAN-01-1998
<PERIOD-END>                               DEC-31-1998
<CASH>                                         308,230
<SECURITIES>                                    75,087
<RECEIVABLES>                                2,141,010
<ALLOWANCES>                                   190,952
<INVENTORY>                                  1,410,609
<CURRENT-ASSETS>                             5,553,136
<PP&E>                                       9,396,236
<DEPRECIATION>                               4,657,393
<TOTAL-ASSETS>                              13,216,213
<CURRENT-LIABILITIES>                        4,962,126
<BONDS>                                      1,339,694
<PREFERRED-MANDATORY>                                0
<PREFERRED>                                          0
<COMMON>                                     1,231,079
<OTHER-SE>                                   4,482,582
<TOTAL-LIABILITY-AND-EQUITY>                13,216,213
<SALES>                                     12,477,845
<TOTAL-REVENUES>                            12,477,845
<CGS>                                        5,394,441
<TOTAL-COSTS>                                5,394,441
<OTHER-EXPENSES>                             1,221,593<F1>
<LOSS-PROVISION>                                41,441
<INTEREST-EXPENSE>                             159,839
<INCOME-PRETAX>                              3,240,599
<INCOME-TAX>                                   907,368
<INCOME-CONTINUING>                          2,333,231
<DISCONTINUED>                                       0
<EXTRAORDINARY>                                      0
<CHANGES>                                            0
<NET-INCOME>                                 2,333,231
<EPS-PRIMARY>                                     1.53<F2>
<EPS-DILUTED>                                     1.51<F2>
<FN>
<F1> Other expenses consist of research and development expenses.
<F2> The EPS information in this exhibit has been prepared in accordance with 
     SFAS No. 128, and Basic and Diluted EPS have been entered in place of 
     Primary and Fully Diluted EPS, respectively.
</FN>
        

</TABLE>
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-99.1
<SEQUENCE>10
<DESCRIPTION>EX 99.1 CAUTIONARY STMT RE FORWARD-LOOKING STMS
<TEXT>

<PAGE>

                                                                   Exhibit 99.1

           CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

The Financial Review, incorporated herein by reference, and other sections of 
this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that are based on 
management's current expectations, estimates and projections.  Words such as 
"expects," "anticipates," "intends," "plans," "believes," "seeks," 
"estimates," variations of these words and similar expressions are intended 
to identify these forward-looking statements.  Certain factors, including but 
not limited to those listed below, may cause actual results to differ 
materially from current expectations, estimates, projections and from past 
results.

  -- Economic factors including changes in the rate of inflation, business 
     conditions, interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates.

  -- Competitive factors, including:  (i) pricing pressures, both in the 
     United States and abroad, primarily from managed care groups and government
     agencies, (ii) the development of new products by competitors having 
     lower prices or superior performance or that are otherwise competitive with
     Abbott's current products,  (iii) generic competition when Abbott's 
     products lose their patent protection, (iv) technological advances and 
     patents obtained by competitors and  (v) problems with licensors, suppliers
     and distributors.

  -- Difficulties and delays inherent in the development, manufacturing, 
     marketing, or sale of products including: (i) efficacy or safety concerns,
     (ii) delays in the receipt of or the inability to obtain required 
     approvals, (iii) the suspension or revocation of the authority necessary
     for manufacture, marketing, or sale, (iv) the imposition of additional or
     different regulatory requirements, such as those affecting labeling, (v)
     seizure or recall of products, (vi) the failure to obtain, the imposition
     of limitations on the use of, or the loss of  patent and other intellectual
     property rights, and (vii) manufacturing or distribution problems.

  -- Governmental action including: (i) new laws, regulations and judicial 
     decisions related to health care availability, method of delivery and 
     payment for health care products and services, (ii) changes in the 
     Federal Food and Drug Administration and foreign regulatory approval 
     processes that may delay or prevent the approval of new products and result
     in lost market opportunity, (iii) new laws, regulations and judicial 
     decisions affecting pricing or marketing and (iv) changes in the tax laws
     relating to Abbott's operations.

  -- Legal difficulties, including product liability claims, claims asserting 
     antitrust violations, disputes over intellectual property rights (including
     patents) and environmental matters, any of which could preclude 
     commercialization of products or adversely affect profitability.

  -- Changes in accounting standards promulgated by the Financial Accounting 
     Standards Board, the Securities and Exchange Commission or the American 
     Institute of Certified Public Accountants.

  -- Changes in costs or expenses, including variations resulting from changes
     in product mix, changes in tax rates both in the United States and abroad,
     the effects of acquisitions, dispositions or other events occurring in 
     connection with evolving business strategies.

No assurance can be made that any expectation, estimate or projection 
contained in a forward-looking statement can be achieved.  Readers are 
cautioned not to place undue reliance on such statements, which speak only as 
of the date made.  Abbott undertakes no obligation to release publicly any 
revisions to forward-looking statements as the result of subsequent events or 
developments.
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
</SEC-DOCUMENT>
-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
